+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 142"
description = "Assets, jewelry"

date = 2021-10-18
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-142"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/898627919222546472/screenshot_1634319966789.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we learn about some proposed changes to how Airshipper downloads
updated assets. We also learn about some changes coming to jewelry.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @ubruntu, @xMAC94x, @nwildner,
@Slipped, @UncomfySilence, @zesterer, @MHK.2012, @kaedr, @Socksonme, @KaliKatz,
@Sharp, and @imbris!

@zesterer reworked the aurora shaders (along with how lighting at night is
handled). You can see the results below. You can read this week's meeting notes
[here](https://hackmd.io/TfBJOE8pRbaHVNyBMB2fBg).

{{
    youtube(id="60kt915avjI")
}}

## Asset downloads by @Christof

Motivated by the network speed issues with Airshipper, I recently made a
proposal for incremental downloads of the game. See the discussion in [this
thread](https://discord.com/channels/449602562165833758/897605984837595206/897606117818007592)
for more details. Basically, this proposal will send the checksum of all the
files to Airshipper which will download only missing and updated parts of the
archive - using either individual file sub-archives or full directories as
needed. These sub-archives can be generated from a complete archive, on the fly
by a cheap server-side logic, and are fully cacheable. The assets are even
identical across architectures.

Also, I found that of the 200MB distribution file only 66MB are taken by the
daily changing binaries, the rest is typically unchanged. Further investigation
showed that the 66MB for `veloren-server-cli.exe` and `veloren-voxygen.exe` can
shrink to 40MB by using a [more efficient
compression](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lempel-Ziv-Markow-Algorithmus) (aka
.lzma or .xz) instead of [deflate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflate) (aka
.gz or zlib). Typically we might avoid this less portable compression method in
zip files, if the archive was meant to be extracted by a different program than
Airshipper. In Airshipper, we can bundle
[lzma-rs](https://lib.rs/crates/lzma-rs) to decompress this format (which is
also supported by 7zip and newer winzip versions).

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/895381646751199342/unknown.png")
}}

## Sneaking by @ubruntu

This week, I refactored character states a bit so that sneaking isn't its own
distinct state in the `CharacterState` enum, but rather it's an attribute of the
"idle" state. The wielding and equipping states also got a stealth variety, and
the end result is that players can pull out their weapons while sneaking. Shout
out to @Slipped for doing all the animation work.

## Jewelry changes by @DoctorKompot

Recently, I've been working on an update for jewelry. Existing rings are being
reworked and some new necklaces are getting added.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/900082505804312616/necklaces.png")
}}

Legendary necklaces (yellow borders):

- **Ankh of Life** - Drops from Mindflayer, an energy-based necklace
- **Carcanet of Wrath** - Drops from Minotaur, gives crit power

Epic necklaces (purple borders):

- **Cultist Amulet** - Drops from Mindflayer, similar stats to the Cultist set,
  well balanced
- **Diamond Necklace** - Craftable, similar stats to the ring, but stronger
- **Ruby Necklace** - Craftable, similar stats to the ring, but stronger
- **Emerald Necklace** - Craftable, similar stats to the ring, but stronger

Rare necklaces (blue borders):

- **Fang Necklace** - Craftable
- **Haniwa Talisman** - Drops from T3 dungeon boss (Golems)
- **Honeycomb Pendant** - Craftable

Uncommon necklaces (green borders):

- **Sapphire, Amethyst, and Topaz Necklaces** - Craftable, similar stats to the
  rings
- **Gold Necklace** - drops, from Sauroks, humanoids, and large cave monsters
- **Seashell** - craftable
- **Gem of Resilience** - (renamed from Gem of Lesser Protection) drops from T2
  dungeon boss

Common necklaces (grey borders):

- **Pendant of Protection** (used to be named Plain Necklace) Drops from T1
  dungeon
- **Low-Quality Necklace** (basically starter item) Scratched necklace Drops
  from T0 dungeon

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/898936693002997760/unknown.png",
    caption="A serene morning. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
