+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 106"
description = "Github mirror, giant trees"

date = 2021-02-08
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-106"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/810526674382749786/Screenshot_513.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see lots of progress on different meta tasks. The Github mirror is
on its way to working, and Torvus is more stable than ever. @zesterer is
experimenting with giant trees, and @LunarEclipse made some changes to the AUR
packages. @Sam has been working on improvements to weapon states.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Snowram, @Sarra_Kitty, @AngelOnFira,
@SWilliamsGames, @Imbris, @PhillippMevbenkamp, @James, @Ambien, and @azymohliad!

@zesterer has been playing around with giant trees. Hopefully, they'll become
sites containing villagers or even small towns in time. Lots of work yet to be
done to get to that stage though. They're 100% procedurally generated, thanks to
@ccgauche's initial work developing the original tree generator code.

{{ youtube(id="3-Zq-yf5w0w") }}

@Gemu is still working on basic one-handed weapons, and made a hydra concept
model. @Pascal fixed a bug where the hammer leap with a low attack speed hammer
would lead to a huge leap that caused fall damage even when on a flat surface.
@Pascal also changed the damage and duration integers to floats throughout the
ability & combat system to reduce typecasts.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/808303646067654696/unknown.png",
    caption="Hydra concept by @Gemu")
}}

@James worked on a functional behavior tree setup that will allow for better
modularization of the agent AI code. @DaforLynx created a system that varies
cricket chirps with temperature.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/807989084840132648/shipwreck.jpg",
    caption="Relics from times long past")
}}

## AUR Improvements by @LunarEclipse

This week, I made some improvements to the AUR packages:

- `veloren-bin` actually works now. I had to write wrappers for the game and the
  server to make them store user data in the system-specific folders instead of
  alongside the executable. (When installed as a system package, the directory
  with the executable is read-only so the game just crashed before changing
  that).
- Veloren and `veloren-git` can now be compiled in a clean chroot. I tracked
  down all the needed compile-time dependencies, so the builds should never fail
  due to those missing.
- All the packages now use the `.desktop`, `.metainfo.xml`, and the icon from
  the game assets instead of custom ones. I actually had no idea those existed
  until someone pointed it out in the comments.

## Weapons Changes with @Sam

I've been changing inventory manipulations that touch equipped slots (e.g. your
weapons and armor) to go through control actions instead of control events. What
this means is that it'll be a bit more limited in when one can change their
loadout, no more swapping weapons from the hotbar while you're actively swinging
a sword. Practically though, there should be very little difference observable
as currently, you'll still be able to freely modify your loadout when not
actively attacking. Eventually, this feature could also be extended to add a
duration to changing loadout slots while wielding a weapon or something similar.

## Torvus Update by @xMAC94x

Short Torvus stability update; thanks to Dumbeldor's metrics additions for
Torvus we now can track operation easily. The change is now for 7 days
operational. Our uptime is a whopping 99,98%! Though we see some errors on
Friday between 2:00 UTC and 3:30 UTC. having those metrics is extremely
important to get reliable data and analyse whether something doesn't work.

[Grafana dashboard](https://grafana.veloren.net/d/j5KisDYMk/torvus?orgId=1) (the
units are in operations per second)

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/808100023073767424/unknown.png")
}}

## The Continued Mirror Issues by @AngelOnFira

This week, I spend some time re-examining our Github mirror problems. The mirror
had been outdated for several months; I last pushed it manually in November 2020. Historically, the mirror has worked. This stopped somewhere around the
beginning of 2020 I think. Before then, Gitlab would periodically send mirror
requests as a built-in feature to our Gitlab repo. This stopped once we went
over our monthly limit for LFS files being sent to Github.

Git is a tool that is meant for non-binary files. The version control method it
uses keeps track of line differences through each commit. This means that if you
navigate to any commit in our tree, it would have to build that commit from all
of the previous changes since the beginning of a repo.

On the other hand, binary files can't have recorded "line changes". Think of a
PNG image, or 3D model file. They're stored in a way that changes drastically
when small changes are made. There isn't a trivial way of breaking down the
changes with the file formats we use for our assets.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/808295315144310784/unknown.png",
    caption="")
}}

This problem is often only seen in game development projects that use Git. In
the AAA industry, other version control tools are used instead. One of the
largest is Perforce, which takes a very different approach to version control.
Since its use case is for very large games with massive assets, its solution
doesn't work the best for other software projects.

So if you are a game that uses Git/Github/Gitlab as your version control
systems, you have to take a different approach. There are a few different ways
around this. Github allows you to "check in" files up to 100 MB. This means that
as long as we have no single asset files that are larger that 100 MB, we can
just use Git like normal, and not care about the fact that any time one of these
binary files change, it has to update the entire file in Git. Ignorance is
bliss.

However, this accrues technical debt. Each time we add a file, it gets stored
permanently in the Git history. So after checking in asset files, and updating
them over and over again, we eventually have a lot of files in the history. This
means whenever someone clones the repo, they would have to download all of these
files that have ever existed in the repo. Currently, this would mean around a
500 MB download for our entire repo.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/808295351811309598/unknown.png",
    caption="")
}}

The alternative to the approach of checking in binary files is to use a tool
called Git LFS, or Git Large File Storage. This will instead store each binary
file as a "pointer" to an external server, and store the assets there. Whenever
you check out a commit, if there are any pointers in the file tree, it will
replace them with downloaded files from the LFS server. This means that you
don't have to have all of the asset files throughout the history of the project,
but instead only the ones for the commit you're on. It saves data for
developers, but also from the Git servers that are hosting the repo.

Gitlab gives us unlimited bandwidth for LFS files, but Github only gives us 2 GB
per month. This means that not only will we go against Github's limit as we
mirror our repo, but anyone who clones the repo from there will tick our limit.
I sent an email to Github asking if we could have the limit removed from the
project, but it didn't get much useful feedback.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/807934112014139422/unknown.png",
    caption="")
}}

So now we seem to be at an impasse. We can't just get the LFS files to redirect
to the Gitlab server that we're hosting our files on, since Github forces them
to be internal. Also, there is really not a lot of documentation around this.
The use case seems to be small enough that it's not worth Github's time to look
into, even for open source projects.

However, I did find a dirty solution to get around this. I manually set up a
Github Action that clones the repo from Gitlab, and uninstalls LFS from it. It
then checks in all of the LFS files as normal Git files, and force pushes it to
the master branch of the Github repo. This means that anyone cloning from Github
will have to download the full repo with all of the assets, but at least we have
an updated repo!

Here is what the Github Action looks like. I currently have it delete any Github
Action workflows, as a bot isn't allowed to push them to the master branch. Each
run takes around 6 minutes, but because Github Actions are free for open source
projects, we can run it once an hour without any worry.

```
steps:
    - name: Install git-filter-repo
    run: git clone https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo.git;
        ./git-filter-repo/git-filter-repo --help

    - name: Clone Gitlab repo
    run: git lfs install;
        git clone https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren.git;

    - name: Uninstall LFS
    run: cd veloren;
        git lfs uninstall;
        git lfs migrate export --include="*" --everything;

    - name: Remove workflow files
    run: cd veloren;
        ../git-filter-repo/git-filter-repo --invert-paths --path .github --force;

    - name: Push changes
    uses: ad-m/github-push-action@master
    with:
        github_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
        branch: master
        force: true
        tags: true
        directory: veloren
```

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/808295399399751680/unknown.png",
    caption="")
}}

There is still more work to be done so that each job can properly run once an
hour, but this is currently the best solution I could find to the problem. I do
hope that Github works on making Git LFS more accessible to open source
projects, as it's quite a necessity for open source games. Github has done well
in recent years to support open source projects, but this alone is one of the
largest reasons Veloren prefers Gitlab to Github.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/808147842169700402/screenshot_1612747791141.png",
    caption="Beauty and the Beast. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
