+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 151"
description = "Editing characters, armor"

date = 2021-12-20
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-151"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/923404438071291904/screenshot_1640227132693.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we hear about how the appearance of characters can now be edited. We
also hear about changes to how armor tooltips are displayed.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @UncomfySilence, @Christof, @flo,
@XVar, @ubruntu, @tygyh, @Slipped, @Snowram, @IsseW, @Sam, @xMAC94x, and
@EvenMeek!

## Editing Characters by @DrDystopia

I've made it possible to edit the appearance of characters after they've been
created. The reason for this was many players have asked for the ability to
change their characters without having to make a new character from scratch.

During the process, I was helped a lot by @zesterer and @Isse. Their greater
understanding was essential to finish this feature.

To add this feature I had to apply a persistency state so that players wouldn't
lose their ability, weapon, and item info when changing the appearance of their
characters. For the screen used to edit the character, we used a stripped-down
version of the original character creator as a base. In doing so we had to
disable the starting weapon, gender, and race choices. The character's inventory
and equipment are not affected by this change and during the editing, the
current equipment is shown.

Other than some delays because people were busy with other features and life in
general, everything worked smoothly and efficiently.

## Devblog Recap by @Dalyc

Be sure to check out last week's devblog recap by @Dalyc if you missed it!

{{ youtube(id="_6SauEbyw6A")}}

## Armor tooltips by @Ubruntu and @James

@Ubruntu worked on item tooltips so that armors don't show stats that have a
value of 0. This makes armor tooltips more compact and their stat benefits more
immediately apparent. New armor stats can now be added in the future without
worrying about excessive clutter to tooltips on unrelated armors.

@James made armor stats optional as far as the code is concerned which will
allow us to add more armor stats without having to add zero values to a bunch of
armor pieces that wouldn't have a given stat.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/923419561024450560/screenshot_1640230672281.png",
    caption="Hanging out with a mammoth. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
