+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 132"
description = "Cameras, physics, weapons"

date = 2021-08-09
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-132"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/875032040263790592/screenshot_1628694083138.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have several writeups from devs. We hear about the status of
modular weapons, some physics improvements, and camera clipping.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @juliancoffee, @Sam, @Snowram,
@pacmanmati, @Treeco, @lboklin, @Xeriab, @XVar, @ubruntu, @imbris, @Capucho,
@zesterer, @UMR1352, @yusdacra, @KnightressPaladin, and @ygor.souoza!

@Christof is thinking about introducing Levenberg-Marquardt to the profession
re-assignment in econsim and seeing the difference in correctness. This clearly
calls out for a writeup, but he is still working on it. There will be a long
form post once it's further along.

## Work by @ubruntu

I tweaked the formula that sets how much experience is required to level up in a
skill tree. The result is that lower-level characters will gain levels a little
faster, while some higher levels take a bit more, but the maximum amount of
experience required to level up is still capped at the same value (1000). I felt
this was necessary because some recent gameplay videos showed new characters
grinding for quite a while before earning their first skill point.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/875195720129478696/Screenshot_from_2021-08-11_21-43-19.png")
}}

## Modular weapon status by @Sam

Modular weapons are in progress. Not all of this has been done in the past week,
I've just been lazy about throwing any updates about modular weapons into the
blog at all until now.

- All crafting mechanics work as desired
- Modular weapons will now automatically resolve their quality and handedness
  from their components (they previously only resolved their stats)
- All modular components have been added as items (they still need models)
- Names are programmatically generated from the shape of components used and the
  material used to make the components
- Wood models and sprites were added for 6 new types of wood that will be used
  in making bows, staffs, and sceptres
- Fixed loading of persisted items to properly handle items that had more than
  one layer of components (and now it supports an arbitrary layer of component
  nesting)
- Changed specification of models for weapons both in the inventory and equipped
  in the hand to work for modular weapons
- Added ability for modular weapons to be randomly generated given a toolkind,
  material, and handedness to allow them to be dropped as loot, given to
  enemies, and offered as stock in a merchant

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/875053773481992282/screenshot_1628699511971.png")
}}

Things that still need to be done before merging:

- Migration to remove many of the old weapons and migrate them to modular
  variants
- Insert all the models for modular weapons after the rest have been made
- Figure out where wood will go to prevent easy progression skips
- Make recipes more interesting
- Various UI/UX improvements to the process of crafting modular weapons
- Balance and stress testing to ensure nothing unexpected is broken

## Dev tweaking by @juliancoffee

This week, I've been working on debugging UX.

- E-gui hotkey toggle, press F7 to enable/disable e-gui debug window (you'll
  still need press F3 to enable debug mode)
- Three new debug lines: Gliding ratio, Gliding Angle of Attack, and Look
  Direction
- Update of asset_tweak module

Now if you compile the game with `--features asset_tweak` you can use `tweak!`
macro from the `common::assets` module. Here is quite a trivial example, I hope
you'll find how to use it in your code.

```rust
use common::assets::tweak;
let x: i32 = tweak!("x", 5);
```

This will create an `assets/tweak/x.ron` file with (5) as its content, but
whenever you'll call it again, it will hot-reload so you can tweak values during
play testing. This works with structs too! They need to implement `Serialize`
and `Deserialize` if you want to use default value.

```rust
use serde::{Deserialize, Serialize};
use common::assets::tweak;

#[derive(Clone, Deserialize, Serialize)]
struct Data {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,
}

let default = Data { x: 5, y: 7 };
let data: Data = tweak!("dimensions", default);
```

Note that struct should have double parentheses (like (5) in previous example
and one pair of parentheses for the struct itself). Check examples and tests in
this module to learn more. And for small combat fixes; beams now follow the
orientation of caster (not look direction like it was before) and agents now can
correctly use it too.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/875903068691111956/screenshot_1628901923021.png")
}}

## Physics improvements by @sudoreboot

This week, I identified and resolved a mistake in the aerodynamics simulation
that improves glide ratios significantly. More specifically, the mistake was
that the lift coefficient included the glider's reference area as a factor. This
messed with the resulting induced drag, which is a function of the (square of
the) lift coefficient and the glider's aspect ratio. In other words, the amount
of drag from angling against the wind was much too high, and now it should be
much lower and more accurate.

I also made the orientation of the glider tend towards the camera direction
while wielding it on the ground. Mostly because it makes the state feel more
visually dynamic and interesting, but also because it makes the transition a
little more seamless.

Between @juliancoffee, @treeco and myself, we managed to come up with a way to
make the different playable species glide equally well while letting them keep
their distinguishing physical attributes, such as size and mass (both of which
were also adjusted to be more sensible). As a side-effect, hitboxes now also
very closely match the characters' models.

## Camera clipping by @klipkonn

{{
    video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/874707658572185680/output.mp4",
    caption="LEFT - old, RIGHT - new")
}}

I've been working on improving camera clipping. I started by reduced camera
clipping by raycasting just outside each camera corner instead of raycasting
only to/from the center. Now the camera will automatically zoom in if the player
model becomes hidden and the target zoom is under 20.

Zooming in makes much more sense in tight environments such as in town as
otherwise it's hard for the player to navigate. The change itself was rather
easy it was by flipping raycasting direction. With further distances, we raycast
from camera towards player until we get out of solid blocks and place camera
there. Now in near distances, we raycast from player to camera until we hit
solid object and then place camera in front of it.

For zoom distances greater than 20, previous behavior was kept to allow trees eg
to pass in front of camera and cause less jumps if zoomed further out. Next,
I'll work on "mode" switching between near and far "mode" as well as on far mode
in the future as I got some great ideas from discussions.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/875054186742566912/screenshot_1628699634801.png",
    caption="Out for a dip. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
