+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 97"
description = ""

date = 2020-12-07
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-97"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/784918554825850880/screenshot_1607208848545.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

A new edition of This Month in Rust Gamedev is out. The worldgen WG had a
meeting. Lots of progress was made on systems all around the codebase.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @XVar, @Sam, @James, @imbris,
@ubruntu, @xMAC94x, @Yusdacra, @Stu, @iOddishGX, @AngelOnFira, and @Weldar!

This week, a new edition of [This Month in Rust
GameDev](https://rust-gamedev.github.io/posts/newsletter-016/) was released!
@Songtronix worked on preparing for Airshipper 0.4.2. @lobster gave a hand by
improving font readability. There was a worldgen meeting that looked at where
worldgen should be worked on in the future. @imbris and @Capucho rebased the
wgpu branch and made some progress on it.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/787059001996738581/screenshot_1607719136875.png")
}}

@Sam worked on adding support for skills to have levels, and began moving the
configuration of things to ron files. @Valtameri is working on the wiki and
adding many weapons and items to it. They are also adding pages explaining the
weapon types and their three different attacks as well.

@James added an aura system to allow entities to supply radial buffs to
surrounding entities. Currently, it is only used at campfires. You can now sit
next to one to slowly regenerate health! In the future auras will also be able
to affect terrain and environment parameters like temperature. @James also began
work on a poise system to govern stuns and take downs.

@Christof removed the old copy of the economic simulation (which still got
executed even though it was never used) and started implementing adaptive access
to natural resources (more military personnel secures a larger area around a
town). Thus you get an economic value to military and thus to weapons and armor,
resulting in market prices relative to food items.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/787111654700613712/screenshot_1607731330157.png")
}}

## Worldgen Meeting by @zesterer

On Saturday, we held a world generation meeting. I'm keenly aware that the world
generation code can be intimidating and unfriendly to new contributors. For this
reason, we made sure to focus the meeting around introducing the concepts that
currently exist in the worldgen code, what direction we're likely to push them
in, and then thoughts about what aspects should be prioritised. No hard
decisions came out of the meeting (I plan to leave such things to a follow-up
meeting) but hopefully it acted as a route for contributors to develop an
interest in world generation and think about where we might go with it in the
future.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/786944703341658132/unknown.png",
    caption="As the sun rises on an empty ocean, you think to yourself... where is my boat? See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
