+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 159"
description = "0.12 Release, defending species"

date = 2022-02-14
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-159"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/943228629301723146/screenshot_1644953774233.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see the 0.12 trailer. We hear about the new travelers that are
being implemented, and how species can now defend each other.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Slipped, @zesterer, @imbris, @James,
@xMAC94x, @floppy, @aweinstock, @Tormod, @XVar, @Crow, @IbrahimBeladi,
@InfRandomness, @DrDystopia, @Pfau, @UnfomfySilince, @ninefox, @phoenix13032005,
and @unvariant!

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/725508097233125407/941725330618601552/unknown.png",
    caption="new map icons for gnarlings, minotaur and mindflayer. Old icons for
comparison.") }}

Another Veloren Reading Club episode is out! In this one, @JulianCoffee talks to
us about getting started with some initial contributions. We see how to create a
new entity, and how to then go through the Merge Request process.

{{ youtube(id="f9PXtKEwedQ") }}

## New travelers by @Juliancoffee

I finished the New Travelers MR based on ideas and work from @UncomfySilence.
That's the same MR we started in the last [Veloren Code Reading
Club](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9PXtKEwedQ), and [here is the link to the
MR](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/merge_requests/3180) if you're
interested.

## 0.12 Release

This weekend, Veloren is releasing 0.12! Check out the trailer to see some of
the changes. The release party will be taking place at 18:00 GMT on February
19th, this is one you won't want to miss!

{{ youtube(id="604JC5QdYQE") }}

## Defending species by @tormeh

I made creatures of the same species defend each other, so individual horses
(for example) in bigger herds should now be a bit harder to pick off one by one.
I was just always annoyed by the fact that I could kill a horse and his buddy
two metres over would be like "Meh, Dave kinda sucked anyway" while continuing
to graze. The biggest problem was probably to figure out if two entities had the
same species or not, as the code isn't particularly well-suited for that exact
problem. Turns out the solution wasn't that complicated in the end, although a
bit verbose.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/940718468645421176/screenshot_1644080509907.png",
    caption="A new traveler ready for adventure. See you next week!") }}

{{ support() }}
