+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 155"
description = "Sword survey, improvements"

date = 2022-01-17
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-155"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/932469997169676318/screenshot_1642388384135.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++



\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @XVar, @tygyh, @Sam, @imbris, @Yurimomo,
@FreeFull, @Pfau, @zesterer, @unvariant, @fetsorn, and @voxal!

{{
    video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/467073814208053248/931922519701749830/2022-01-15_14-45-48.mp4")
}}

{{
    video(src="https://discord.com/channels/449602562165833758/597826574095613962/932291116227768350")
}}

@tormeh I made item shortcuts in the hotbar independent of inventory sort, so you can sort your possessions without losing the hotkey for your potions

@Snowram

I added a new skeleton to the game : the arthropod. Here is the new batch of creatures you will encounter soon...

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/932769379366608926/screenshot_1642435159058.png")
}}

@James Broke up the monolithic agent system into several modules that will hopefully make it easier to work with

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/932813747226046534/screenshot_1642469557573.png",
    size=50)
}}

## @zesterer

I've been working with @Slipped [GMT -5] on getting mounts ready for players.

We did already have a mounting system, but it was weird, arcane, and fundamentally broken in a variety of ways. It integrated very poorly with the rest of the game and was full of bugs. For this reason, it wasn't player-facing: only admin-spawned entities could be mounted.

This week, that all changed! I finally had the time to sit down and rewrite the entire mounting system from the ground up. It's now very reliable, has fewer bugs (although there may still be some: please report them!), and has more features. New features include:

- New jumping/mounting animations (thanks @Slipped [GMT -5] )
- Interaction hints when close to entities (talk, trade, mount, pick up, etc.)
- Mounted combat: you can use weapons while mounted, to a limited degree (certain moves are disabled for now)
- Teleporting while mounted now works. You can use /home while riding a mount!

slipped: shoutouts to snowram and imbris too for setting up the mounted animation some months back, which we now get to use

{{
    youtube(id="fJpeOJT78TI")
}}

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/931372046561210368/screenshot_1642126767716.png",
    caption="")
}}

{{ support() }}
