+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 113"
description = "Mindflayer, fixes"

date = 2021-03-29
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-113"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/825884189344792626/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have lots of work being done on optimization fronts, as well as
world improvements. We hear from several developers about what they've been
working on this week.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Snowram, @Sam, @zesterer, @xMAC94x,
@Capucho, @imbris, @Treeco, @XVar, @Sharp, @aweinstock, @SWilliamsGames,
@Christof, @Pfau, @Slipped, @Desttinghim, @aljazerzen, @yusdacra, @Quibble,
@Synis, @steanne, and @heydabop!

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/824340312805605376/Bildschirmfoto_von_2021-03-24_18-53-27.png")
}}

This week, @Sam got the Mindflayer merged. @Songtronix was working on some bot
upgrades. @YuriMomo has been keeping up with testing new features. @zesterer
overhauled clouds to make them faster and prettier. @Treeco added a command to
teleport to sites by name, and a server setting to specify the player spawn
site. @Treeco also generated a new default map, and another larger one for the
server to switch to. @XVar completed the switch from Diesel to Rusqlite, which
should make working with the database code simpler as well as provide full SQL
trace logging.

@Desttinghim added commands to define build areas. This allows admins to set up
specific areas where building can be done. Individual players can be given
permission to build in these.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/824640058145243176/screenshot_1616679562802.png")
}}

### Mindflayer by @Sam

The Mindflayer has 4 new abilities. It can attack you with cursed flames, which
not only burn you, but also drain away your max health. It can create a necrotic
vortex to drain the life from surrounding creatures and replenish its own. It
can step through dimensions, to instantly teleport to you across short
distances. And it can summon husks of previous victims it has devoured to fight
for it.

### Terrain messages by @xMAC94x

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/825845678647410758/unknown.png")
}}

Terrain messages are now handled in multiple threads. You can see a visual
improvement from the left side to the right. Especially on HIGH load, such as
release parties, this helps us stay stable. It also increases our Multi-core
usage from 69% to 71%, therefore increasing the efficiency of high CPU core
servers that we provision for large events.

### Various goodies by @aweinstock

- I fixed a server-side `.expect` failure on entity/UID lookups when a player
  disconnected during a trade.
- I added coin-denominated prices to the item tooltips during a trade.
- A few price-related fixes:
  - Glowing Remains were previously `Ingredients` instead of `Armor`, resulting
    in it being 15x cheaper than the finished Mindflayer Spellbag.
  - Diamonds (and gems in general) were too cheap because the weights of the
    loot tables containing them didn't match rates at which the loot tables
    would be rolled in-game.
- I added some steeper spiral stairs to dungeons, with a hole in the center that
  can be glided down.
- Airships/birds now cast multiple rays below/in front of them, so it's more
  likely that they'll detect trees/cliffs and rise in time not to get stuck.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/827360681438609468/Joe_screenshot_1617234898596.jpg",
  caption="Wating for the ride to the next village. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
