+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 167"
description = "Finances"

date = 2022-04-11
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-167"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/965645526735388691/screenshot_1650298194861.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see a breakdown of the finances over the last several months.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @juliancoffee, @imbris, @xMAC94x, @Sam,
@holychowders, and @oversram!

## Finances by @AngelOnFira

I recently went and took care of several months of finances. You can see [the
results
here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Fk6kDsCdZLhVszXdsWUjoG4Cgc3cLbTqJgZ-gY3Ndq0/edit#gid=0)
(please feel free to reach out if you come across any discrepancies). Since
there were several months of invoices to process, it resulted in over $1,200 USD
being expensed from [the Veloren Open
Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren/expenses). Currently, Veloren is
paying for services from Hetzner (compute), Wasabi (storage), and OVH (temporary
download server).

Below, you can see the revenue from Open Collective over each month. We can see
that most months are around $200 USD, but we had some large donations in
November and December of 2021. We also can see that in 2022, we're trending
towards $250 each month.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/966856113599430686/unknown.png")
}}

Over time, our monthly Hetzner bill has increased. This is because we've had to
provision progressively more powerful game servers. Currently, we're at the
highest tier that Hetzner provides for normal cloud servers, and this lets us
handle around 100 players at once. Ideally, the next level after this is
distributing to multiple servers.

Altogether, we seem to be trending upwards in the number of people who donate.
In the near future, I hope that this will help us host more servers around the
world with confidence that we'll be financially stable enough to keep them
going. And of course, as always, donations are always appreciated!

{{ support() }}
