+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 137"
description = "0.11 Release"

date = 2021-09-13
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-137"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/886398362868400128/screenshot_1631404304436.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we break down how the 0.11 release party went and examine server
metrics.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @Sam, @Capucho, @xMAC94x,
@imbris, and @Pfau!

This week, 0.11 was released! The release party was the largest yet, with 181
players on the server at once. You can read the blog post with the changelog
[here](https://veloren.net/release-0-11/). If you haven't already, check out the
trailer:

{{ youtube(id="l1oOjvaWJlw") }}

During the release party, some devs chatted about what new changes there were,
as well as some more technical details about the launch. You can check that out
here:

{{ youtube(id="J5Xz-vbE27Q") }}

## Analyzing the release party by @AngelOnFira

> Images by @YuriMomo

This release party was by far the best yet from the perspective of the
infrastructure team.

In previous releases, our server started having major issues as we reached our
record player counts. There were also several issues we didn't see before having
that many players online, such as deadlocks in players connecting, or having
certain systems taking longer each tick, causing a snowball effect.

With this release however, we did not experience any of these issues. The
largest problem we found was that our entity sync system was taking too much
time, since it hasn't been parallelized properly. But it didn't cause larger
issues in the release party. Even with the 181 players, the server was still
operating nominally!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307840938377217/886339358968381510/unknown.png",
    caption="Server statistics over the release party")
}}

We ran the release party on a 48 core compute server in a Hetzner datacenter.
For [the last release party](https://veloren.net/devblog-124/), we used a 32
core server. Throughout that party, we were still struggling under the load of
several systems. It's hard to say how much this server helped improve the
performance overall, but it clearly helped with several of the larger systems.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307840938377217/886339863870320721/unknown.png")
}}

In the image above, we can see that the heaviest systems are terrain and
physics. Each tick is supposed to be around 33 milliseconds, which will create
30 ticks per second. Terrain is taking 523 ms, while physics is taking 252 ms.
This is because they are combining work over all 48 cores to add to this time.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307840938377217/886340460006756362/unknown.png")
}}

Above, we get a larger breakdown of the "slow systems" that are taking up time
on the main thread. We can see that times for the terrain and physics systems
are quite small since they're parallelizing nicely. However, entity sync is much
higher. We can also see that it becomes a larger problem later during the
release party. This should be fixed before the next large server party.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307840938377217/886340057257087006/unknown.png")
}}

Above, we can see our bandwidth usage. At peak, we were transmitting around 40
megabytes per second. This is about a third of what the cloud server can offer
with its gigabit internet, but we should expect it not to meet those limits, as
cloud instances share the uplink with other VMs on the same host machine. Going
forward, bandwidth is something we'll work on improving. This is both to take
the load off the server, but make it easier for clients as well.

## Community videos

{{ youtube(id="SqvndmDVq1Y") }}

{{ youtube(id="mgiBwuc6om8") }}

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/886685893275045898/screenshot_1631386070929.png",
    caption="Adventurers at the release party. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
