+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 163"
description = "Audio, Hacker News"

date = 2022-03-14
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-163"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/952752275451949107/screenshot_1647224145136.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about some work on the audio system. We also look at some of
the stats from last week's post on Hacker News.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @imbris, @Tormod, @DaforLynx, @Sam, @Isse,
@zesterer, @Slipped, @xMAC94x, and @Treeco!

@ubruntu worked on adding decorations and sprites to houses and learning site2
as they go.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/950797998382784553/screenshot_1646461498968.png")
}}

## Audio work by @DaforLynx

I've merged a bunch of audio work. I fixed the swimming sounds from playing too
unevenly and fixed the glider closing and opening sounds not playing at the
right times. I also made it so faster segments of rivers (i.e. most of them)
make a "rushing river" sound, while slow-flowing river segments make the old
"bubbling" sound. Keep in mind that river speed currently has no effect on
gameplay outside of worldgen and these sounds.

Lastly, I added sounds to the gliding that makes it sound like the cloth of the
glider is flapping in the wind. It's very subtle, but it should add a bit more
auditory interest to long glides. Also, town music is back after being broken by
site2 towns :)

## Hacker News stats by @AngelOnFira

This week, a post about Veloren reached the top of Hacker News for half a day.
You can [read the post](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=30667022) if you
like. The comment section had quite a few good discussions, and I took the time
to answer several questions myself. Out of interest, I wanted to see how the
post affected our YouTube views. Below is an image of the stats:

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/952959000058675230/unknown.png")
}}

{{ support() }}
