+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 133"
description = "Terrain persistence"

date = 2021-08-16
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-133"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/878100522521993216/screenshot_1629423758514.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about updates to the state of terrain persistence. There are
also optimizations being worked on with our real-time simulation system. A brief
overview of our server history is also included.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @alykhouzov, @ygor.souza, @Sam,
@juliancoffee, @imbris, @zesterer, @DanTheOne, @DaniilNemtsev, @xMAC94x,
@nwildner, @xeriab, @tygyh, and @klipkonn.

You can read this week's meeting notes
[here](https://hackmd.io/DiDftO_sTqCaPMRR4crZ5g).

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/876580411327807498/screenshot_1629063467106.png")
}}

### RTSim optimizations by @ubruntu

This is still a work in progress, but last week I worked on splitting up the
iteration of RTSim entities so that each entity is updated every n ticks
(whatever that number ends up being). Hopefully, this improves performance a
little as RTSim entities don't need their simulated behavior to happen every
server tick when they are off-screen and away from players. This shouldn't cause
any noticeable changes for players.

### Terrain persistence by @zesterer

Last week, the `min_persistent_world` branch was merged.

It adds an experimental terrain persistence system. When enabled, changes made
to the world with build mode will be written to disk and will not disappear on
server restart or chunk unload.

It comes with some very big caveats: the system is not intended to be a
player-facing or a general-purpose build system. It is not stable,
well-integrated into the rest of the game, nor do we guarantee support for it
moving forwards. Additionally, it is intended to be replaced entirely in the
future (with no migration) with a proper player-oriented zone-based building
system. Things can and will break!

It exists primarily as a way for server admins to add small customisation to
their worlds to improve the experience for players.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/877553031313502268/unknown.png")
}}

See [this page](https://book.veloren.net/players/building.html#persistence) in
The Book for more detailed information about terrain persistence. Here are a few
ideas for things that server admins could use the feature for:

- Gliding courses demarcated with pillars and hoops for glider racing.
- A custom spawn zone complete with crafting stations and meeting areas for
  players.
- Mining challenges (using mineable blocks like WeakRock and ores) that players
  can partake in. Because mining is not persisted, any mined blocks will
  naturally regenerate when the chunk reloads!
- Custom mazes and climbing/jumping challenges for players with rewards in the
  form of chests/ores/etc.
- Pixel artwork and sculptures dotted around the world for players to find.
- Visual customisations to existing world structures like towns and dungeons
  that make them more interesting to explore.

If you end up making something interesting with the feature, please tell us!
We'd like to see what you come up with. Feedback is also appreciated, although
bear in mind that the feature is not supposed to be extensive or player-facing.

### A brief history of our servers by @AngelOnFira

*The following was taken from a thread on the Bevy Discord about server costs.*

Just happened across this thread, and although I don't know the entire context,
I can give some interesting stats from Veloren. We used to host our main game
server out of the basement of one of our devs. But when we had release parties,
we would expect around 50 players to join. At the time, we were used to around 1
MB/s of bandwidth per player, and so over a release party, we normally saw
around 100 GB of bandwidth used. We were hosting on Digital Ocean and AWS.

Over the last few months, we've been transferring all of our servers over to
Hetzner in Germany. Their bandwidth costs are pretty great for cloud servers, 20
TB/month for any instance, and about 1.20 Euros for every Terabyte after. It is
still difficult to do NA game servers though. But for distributing our game
binary and assets, it works quite well.

A rough estimate from [our
dashboard](https://grafana.veloren.net/d/boL6rzSGk/airshipper?orgId=1) shows
that we get about 700 downloads per day, and our download size is around 160 MB.
So that's about 110 GB of download bandwidth per day. We are running this on a
dedicated server Hetzner server though, which has no bandwidth cap.

{{
  video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/875904112892465192/simplescreenrecorder-2021-08-13_17.49.43.mp4",
  caption="Groovin with the gang. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
