+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 109"
description = "Sites, trading, and assets"

date = 2021-03-01
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-109"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/815229404917268530/screenshot_1614436063853.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have many writeups. We hear from @zesterer, @Christof,
@Sarra_Kitty, @Sam, @VincentFoulon80, and @aweinstock.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Slipped, @ccgauche, @heydabop,
@xMAC94x, @imbris, @Lerg-exe, @aweinstock, @zesterer, @Snowram, @Pfau, @Timo,
@Sarra_Kitty, @nwildner, and @AngelOnFira!

As we prepare for the 0.9 release on March 20th, we've seen many changes getting
merged. This week @zesterer worked on a site overhaul. @Christof has been continuing
work
on NPC merchants. @Sarra_Kitty has been improving the number of models that are
in the water. @Sam made many changes around buffs and combat. @aweinstock has
been continuing work on player-to-player trading, as well as modular weapons.
@VincentFoulon80 has been working on icons for skill trees.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816121094469320734/screenshot_1614648598262.png")
}}

## Site Overhaul by @zesterer

I've been working on the new site overhaul. As part of that, I'm working on a
generator system that allows other developers to define their own structure
generation rules with a system similar to CAD-style CSG ([Constructive Solid
Geometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructive_solid_geometry)). CSG is
pretty great because it allows you to define your geometry using simple
primitives and then combine them using boolean operators to produce new
geometry.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/815961947358887976/unknown.png")
}}

This new approach comes with a few notable advantages:

- It's much easier to define your own geometry than the old sample-based API
  that required a lot of boundary logic and reasoning in multiple coordinate
  spaces.
- It's 'backend-agnostic'. Although right now we're 'rendering' the geometry
  into blocks, it might be possible to render it to other outputs in the future
  such as low-poly geometry for the LoD system.
- It's modular and independent of the underlying structure of the building, so
  you can take a CSG-style structure and adjust it to fill whatever dimensions
  you require and the system can adapt accordingly

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/815961970104336394/image.png")
}}

I've also been working on the layout of sites themselves. The new site system
uses a tile-based grid for positioning 'plots' (buildings, roads, etc.). Each
tile is 7x7 blocks and belongs to exactly one plot.

This system is much more flexible since plots may define their own generation
rules independently of other plots which makes modularising the generation code
much easier and lowers barriers for other developers wanting to work on world
generation.

It'll also allow us to generate sites that take almost any structure we want,
mixing and matching elements throughout history simulation as appropriate. We
could, for example, generate a town with a castle-like perimeter wall, a
fortress with a dungeon in the middle, or a port village surrounded by ruins.

Because the only thing required to tie these elements together is the plot-based
tile grid, the work required to allow different procedural elements to work
together is significantly reduced and the brunt of the work now gets placed on
the layout generator rather than the generators of the individual structures
themselves.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/815961996017139712/image.png")
}}

## Trader NPCs @Christof

I modified the town spawning code to generate merchants. They wear nice
colorful armor, carry some local wares - determined by local economic numbers -
and accept trading invitations. It makes use of the recent user interface additions by
@aweinstock. Unfortunately, I will need to adjust the wares and balance the
prices before this gets ready for inclusion into the game.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816104653326385222/Merchant_Armor.jpg")
}}

Here is an updated merchant screenshot. A less beautiful merchant, but much nicer wares: a bag for each, filled with armor, weapons, craft material, food, potions. Side note: This town has spent all its coin in other markets, so they will gladly accept coins, but if you sell items they can only offer goods in exchange.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816452162753658940/TradeExtended.jpg")
}}

## Assets for Water by @Sarra_Kitty

I implemented the spawning of coral reef and kelp forest sprites in all bodies
of water at or below the world sea level. They are temperature-dependent, and
the two environments transition between each other if the climate changes.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816120568247484426/screenshot_1614647989588.png")
}}

Additionally, I added seagrass patches that can spawn along the coast, the grass
actually spawns in the water, but pokes out above it, so it gives a nice
transition from land to the sea. In the future, there will be more content
underwater, new mobs, generated structures, and also plants and scenery for
freshwater ponds and lakes that generate inland above sea level as well.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816120696509956146/screenshot_1614648106025.png")
}}

Compared to what we had before with barren seafloor, this is a
massive improvement and makes for a lot more of a welcoming environment
underwater for players to explore. There already should be seashells scattered
rarely around, for you to find, and I plan to add more you can do to keep the
underwater areas fun and interesting, not just pretty to look at. Hopefully, we
can give the lakes and ponds inland the same treatment soon.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816120962276786186/screenshot_1614648501757.png")
}}

## Lots of Work by @Sam

I've changed the saturation buff from food to queue. This means that only the
currently active saturation buff will tick its duration, and any inactive ones
instead wait until they are active before their duration begins to tick.

I finally integrated some sword and bow models that Gemu had created multiple
months prior. Most of the previous sword and bow models were replaced.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/817224546096382002/screenshot_1614911811442.png")
}}

I've also changed how auras apply buffs. Instead of applying a buff only when an
entity does not already have a buff of that kind and then applying the buff
every second, it instead applies the buff and then doesn't tick the duration for
that buff until the entity is no longer in range of the aura.

I've added a combo component to the player (and other entities). Instead of
combo melee scaling its combo only within that attack state, it instead
increases the combo in the component. Combo then resets to 0 after 5 seconds of
not increasing. This has a few advantages, but the one with the immediate effect
is that the sword, axe, and hammer can retain the advantages of having some
combo when you use an attack that isn't combo melee or when you stop attacking
for half a second. It will also allow us to use combo for different things as
well, including the potential to use combo as a resource for some attacks.

I also fixed torvus a couple times when it broke earlier this week.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/816120829985292368/screenshot_1614648430470.png")
}}

## Skilltree Icons @VincentFoulon80

I finished implementing the new icons onto the skill tree. I also added the main
and secondary attack as dummy skill at the center of each sections (top-left and
top-right). I think these additional icons are handy to find out which skill you
will improve.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/816362671662039121/skilltree.gif")
}}

## Trading and Modular Weapon Update by @aweinstock

Regarding trade, I implemented the ability for each party to see the
counter party's inventory and request items from it by dragging them into the
trade window. Since trading works on any entity with an `Inventory` and a
`Controller`, it should work with NPC merchants as soon as their AI (`Agent`)
emits the `Controller` actions corresponding to trade. I also added a coin item,
and made some finishing touches to @heyzoos's item stack splitting MR that
allowed it to be merged.

Regarding modular weapons, I added support for making the stats of a weapon or
weapon component different based on the materials it's made out of, so a generic
claymore blade recipe and a generic scimitar blade recipe can each make (bronze,
iron, cobalt, etc) blades of the corresponding type, which can then be added to
any hilt.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/815806064548904980/screenshot_1614572544089.png",
  caption="Flying sky-high. See you next week!")
}}

Support our devs!

[Veloren Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren)

@Pfau: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/pfau)

@Songtronix: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/songtronix)

@xMAC94x: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/xmac94x)

@Acrimon: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/acrimon)
