+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 178"
description = ""

date = 2022-06-27
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-178"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/991382805055537172/Screenshot_2022-06-23_19-58-52.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have a great writeup from @Sharp about optimizations being made to
the site2 system.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @juliancoffee, @xMAC94x, @runrobdog,
@BrandonDyer, @imbris, and @Sam!

## Site2 optimizations by @Sharp

I've been working on speeding up site2 rendering time by roughly an order of
magnitude across the board. Site2 greatly simplifies things for developers by
giving them normal geometric primitives to work with (rather than forcing them
to write everything in a sampling-based way), and allowing direct draws of
primitives to occur in a specific order with different fills.

(Un)fortunately, site2's power and ease of use has led to a lot of rather
expensive patterns and primitives being used to emulate things like archways,
hollowed-out rooms, or sprites on the ground. This, combined with the actual
rendering still being done in a mostly sampling-based way (albeit with a bit of
cleverness around bounding boxes), has resulted in large regressions in overall
render time for chunks, putting us far out of reach of our end goal if we want
to support higher view distances or larger numbers of players.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/988484723976339466/screenshot_1655739209947.png")
}}

Chunk generation times are highly variable and depend on many factors (player
count, player distribution, and view distance) that we don't have much control
over, and as maps get bigger and servers get fuller, these factors are likely to
grow.

While it's true that chunks can mostly render in parallel, many players play
single player or use servers with only a handful of cores; on such systems,
driving generation into the background isn't as helpful as it seems. Even on
beefy servers, any CPU cycles spent on chunk generation are *not* being spent on
more useful work (plus, it's lame to restrict players to such a small view
distance!).

Even if most cores are ideal, many systems (and players themselves!) can't run
or perceive anything until a chunk is loaded, so slow chunk generation time has
a disproportionate impact on perceived latency. This is especially true in the
context of very fast transport systems, such as high speed trains, which require
loading new chunks very rapidly in order to keep up with the player.

We've recognized that this is a problem for a while, so @aweinstock had been
working on a pretty interesting idea--JIT compiling expensive nodes in the site2
render tree, then evaluating it! While he got impressive results from doing
this, even taking the JIT compilation overhead into account, the total time
still seemed much too high to me. Since even if you have a JIT compiler, having
a faster interpreter is still always beneficial (since you can compile in the
background, or use the interpreter for all but the most expensive nodes), I
decided to see what improvements we could get by improving the interpreter
instead.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/991429549730566274/screenshot_1656445470301.png")
}}

Fortunately, because site2 is so high-level, there is a lot of room to optimize
the interpreter! I quickly realized that there was a *lot* of low-hanging fruit
in that department, and the improvements quickly grew to the point where the
interpreter was finishing well before JIT compilation had a chance to finish.
Some techniques applied so far include:

* Added UnionAll and IntersectAll primitives, which reduce the amount of time
  spent recursing through the tree and result in easier and more frequent
  chances for optimization.
* Added a proper cost model to decide join ordering on unions, intersections,
  and differences.
* Reducing the number and capabilities of primitives, allowing us to focus more
  on optimizing the remaining ones (for example, we have removed arbitrary
  fills, and now insist that all lazy primitives be convex).
* Changing from a sampling-based approach that walks the tree per-voxel, to one
  that walks the tree to find bounding volumes; we now maintain a context with a
  mask, transformation matrix, and stack of partially applied intersections,
  which allows us to delay evaluation efficiently.
* Pushing down unions and intersections as far as possible, only dropping to
  point-based approaches when we hit a primitive (so we iterate over small,
  mostly-disjoint AABBs).
* Some tentative initial applications of explicit SIMD (to parts of the segment
  prism algorithm). Over time, we will probably convert the entire render loop
  to SIMD, treating the mechanics of rendering more like we would a GPU.
* A lot of heroic optimizations for difficult primitives and special cases (for
  example, superquadrics are about 4x as fast as they were with a more naive
  approach, due to exploiting symmetry, inline caching, and the fact that they
  have explicit solutions in restricted cases).
* Avoiding per-voxel dynamic dispatch on fills (which turns out to have a *huge*
  impact in some cases, e.g. cliff towns).
* Restricting differences statically to ensure that the domain is strict
  (inspired by polarized type theory).

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/449660795857403905/965039450746925066/screenshot_1650153591405.png")
}}

These, plus a number of other miscellaneous optimizations, have resulted in very
significant wins! Caveat: some features still need to be enabled, and segments
are broken in ways that may affect benchmarks, so some of these may regress a
bit--but they are very impressive...

* Gnarling fortresses are about 15x faster than they were on master, and render
  in about 2.1 ms / chunk. While they are segment-heavy and therefore might
  regress, they also have the most complex geometry by far of any site2 to date,
  and don't use any custom fills, so they have much more room for improvement by
  optimizing geometry than any of the other sites do. Therefore, I'm fairly
  confident that we will end up at least 15x faster after my changes are
  complete.
* Dungeons are about 7x faster than they were on master, and render in about 3.3
  ms / chunk (they lag other results because they are almost entirely
  bottlenecked on their complex custom fill, which I have not spent much time
  optimizing because dungeons are due for a rewrite anyway). This improvement
  also *seems* to have some impact on server startup time!
* Cliff towns are 7x faster than they were after some other fairly significant
  performance improvements, so they are likely at least 10x faster than master
  (I'd guess a lot more, since they heavily use large intersected
  superquadrics).
* Cities use a lot of primitives that haven't been optimized, so it's hard to
  say how they would compare to master (we didn't have an old benchmark for
  them), but they render in under 2ms / chunk.
* Giant trees were not benchmarked on master, but they now actually render at
  less than 125 μs per chunk (which was my original super stretch goal time for
  chunk rendering--I believe this is the first time we have hit that with a
  realistic structure!). Avoiding dynamic dispatch on fills, alone, made giant
  trees over 4x faster than they were after other fairly significant performance
  improvements compared to master, so it is likely that they also saw an order
  of magnitude speedup overall. However, they are very segment-heavy, so it's
  difficult to say where they'll end up after segments are fixed.

Finally, to validate that the existing optimizations are indeed useful, I ported
citadel code from @zesterer's branch (which I'd never looked at before), fixed
it to be compatible with my current code (which required only a handful of
changes, since it was already correctly polarized), and then benchmarked it.

As it turns out, it was very superquadric, union, and intersection-with-AABB
heavy, so it benefited from many of the optimizations mentioned above!  Citadels
now render in only about 650 μs/chunk--making them more efficient than any site
except giant trees. I am extremely confident that this represents more than a
10x improvement over the old branch (I included some pictures of it to break up
the text!).

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/988484724500602940/screenshot_1655738087967.png")
}}

Going forward, there are still several more optimizations to implement before I
submit my changes (this is by no means the end of possible optimizations--I have
many more ideas!--but it's a good stopping point assuming that we can maintain
our order of magnitude improvement after segments are fixed and differences are
added back):

* Draw immediately when fill is called, rather than allocating into a primitive
  array first and then dispatching later.
* Add efficient internal algorithms for rendering the remaining primitives, in
  both the intersection and masked cases (and consolidate any we no longer
  need).
* Make sharing of primitives *explicit* and visible to the user, so we avoid
  recomputing the same primitive too many times (at least in some cases) and
  instead cache enough information to efficiently re-render the volume. This
  should be especially useful for hard "problem" cases, such as the various
  hacks we use to ensure sprites in caves lie on the floor.
* Reimplement differences, using the fact that we have an explicit primitive to
  efficiently mask it out by inverting it.
* Also use the above technique when distributing intersections over unions (or
  at least cache some information, such as data allocated in the arena, to avoid
  exponential explosions in memory use).

As well as extra cleanup work:

* Finish up filling in cost model details that have been omitted so far (since
  it turned out that improving render performance was far more important than
  getting the cost model correct given where we currently are).
* Finish up work needed to make sure all values are validated on construction
  and that we don't have more than a handful of ways of directly constructing
  the primitive.
* Finish up making sure that correctly polarized combinations of unions and
  intersections all actually *work* (this part is quite unfinished, since
  validating the performance improvements only required dealing with the
  patterns that we actually use so far).
* Do a better job of avoiding recursion in common cases (this one may be hard).
* Figure out a proper structure for the various kinds of heroic optimizations we
  have, categorize them, and put them in their own files, so we can focus on
  them individually rather than having gigantic, messy functions. Keep the core
  loop of the interpreter small.

Overall, I am really excited about these (and future!) improvements, especially
in tandem with improvements elsewhere (such as the preliminary design of a site2
visual editor, hierarchical plots, and discussions about how better to handle
common cases like putting sprites on the floor and walls). Hopefully, these
improvements are able to make it into the game in some capacity within the next
month or two!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/991530075944144966/screenshot_1656469400734.png")
}}

### Update #1

I seem to have gotten another order of magnitude performance win with the first
future work suggestion in the post ("draw immediately").

New numbers (faster across the board, generally much faster, with roughly
equivalent geometry). The "render" is the relevant one here, the `generate_` are
testing something that only happens at server startup (AFAIK). Every site type
tested now renders in under 1ms / chunk, and many of them run at around double
that speed (500 microseconds / chunk). Giant trees, the surprise champions from
earlier, render in a ridiculous 40 microseconds / chunk!  These numbers will
regress with proper segments, but not by nearly enough to lose our order of
magnitude improvements.

Below are some of the results of the benchmarks, but you can see the rest of
them
[here](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/988921561769738270/New_benchmarks).

```
generate_city           time:   [19.520 ms 19.538 ms 19.559 ms]                          
                        change: [-0.3957% -0.1977% +0.0013%] (p = 0.05 > 0.05)
                        No change in performance detected.
Found 9 outliers among 100 measurements (9.00%)
  1 (1.00%) low severe
  2 (2.00%) low mild
  2 (2.00%) high mild
  4 (4.00%) high severe

render_city/identity_allocator                                                                             
                        time:   [3.4023 ms 3.4114 ms 3.4207 ms]
                        thrpt:  [1.7540 Kelem/s 1.7588 Kelem/s 1.7635 Kelem/s]
                 change:
                        time:   [-2.3020% -1.9525% -1.6172%] (p = 0.00 < 0.05)
                        thrpt:  [+1.6438% +1.9913% +2.3562%]
                        Performance has improved.

generate_cliff_town     time:   [6.9444 ms 6.9518 ms 6.9609 ms]                                
                        change: [-0.2329% -0.0320% +0.1523%] (p = 0.75 > 0.05)
                        No change in performance detected.
Found 13 outliers among 100 measurements (13.00%)
  6 (6.00%) high mild
  7 (7.00%) high severe

render_cliff_town/identity_allocator                                                                             
                        time:   [2.0587 ms 2.0692 ms 2.0800 ms]
                        thrpt:  [1.9230 Kelem/s 1.9331 Kelem/s 1.9430 Kelem/s]
                 change:
                        time:   [-4.5641% -3.8519% -3.1480%] (p = 0.00 < 0.05)
                        thrpt:  [+3.2503% +4.0062% +4.7823%]
                        Performance has improved.

generate_dungeon        time:   [4.2436 ms 4.2503 ms 4.2572 ms]                              
                        change: [+0.3002% +0.5213% +0.7344%] (p = 0.00 < 0.05)
                        Change within noise threshold.
Found 2 outliers among 100 measurements (2.00%)
  1 (1.00%) high mild
  1 (1.00%) high severe
```

### Update #2

I just got a 5x improvement to forested chunks by (basically) rendering them
with site2 after my changes, even with the old segments algorithm!  Since tree
chunks are very common they tend to in practice be a huge bottleneck, so this is
a very welcome development. I still need to add back a bit of the old
functionality and figure out the differences between old and new tree rendering
to make this fully apples to apples, but I think that improvement will remain 🙂

> That's all of the updates on site2 performance, but @Sharp will be back in
> later posts with more updates. Stay tuned!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/991085406529396776/Schermafdruk_van_2022-05-08_01-52-51.png",
    caption="A bright night. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
