+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 82"
description = "0.8 intro, sound effects"

date = 2020-08-24
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-82"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/744635568675094578/screenshot_1597605278738.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we had the 0.8 intro meeting. We hear from @Ellinia about the process
being used to create sound effects for the game.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @xMAC94x, @Pfau, @james, @imbris,
@sovareign, @Songtronix, @Sam, @rdbaker, @AngelOnFira, @Sharp, @Spyros,
@T-Dark0, and @marius!

@Felixader has been working on lore for cities, cultures, and races. New colours
were merged in this week, with help from @zesterer and @Pfau. @Pfau also
rebalanced the behaviour of monsters, improved loot tables, and made lots of
small UI and UX fixes.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/747431314449367080/unknown.png",
  caption="Tooltip borders now fit the UI theme and you can see account names in
  the social menu by hovering")
}}

@Capucho was working on wgpu a bit, however there were some compiler blockers
preventing continued work.

# 0.8 Intro Meeting

This weekend, we held a [0.8 intro
meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/187xtMIXdOl43lUprSIad09FNmAs4kSIVfbjwtGdG0NY/edit?usp=sharing).
This included the normal discussions of what we want to see for the version,
summed up into a "definition of 0.8". We also examined what we achieved since
0.7, and what we missed out on.

**Completed**

- LoD!
- Networking?
- More advanced UI
- Combat feedback
- Particle systems
- SFX
- Animations

**Didn’t do**

- Quests
- Interactions in settlements
- Story

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/746533362050662491/screenshot_1598051720773.png")
}}

**Definition of 0.8**

As a player, I want more interactions with settlements and npcs. I want to be
able to see a mountain off in the distance and be told to go there and complete
a task. I want to feel like I’m a part of the world around me, and making a
difference.

While in combat, I want to feel like I synergize with the players around me. I
want to team up, and be able to use my unique skills to be a valuable member of
the team. I want to be more immersed in what I hear and see.

**Budget**

We also examined what a budget for Veloren might look like. Since we are
receiving donations on open collective, we want to come up with a healthy
pipeline making use of the funds, and transparently tracking them. The primary
item we want to secure is infrastructure. We will be getting a server, likely
from Hetzner, that will allow us to run CI, the game server, as well as other
services we use. You can see the budget
[here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1E9Kf2BNkrxw8g4PnoujOaOPxk0T80qlQ3o1caBc1Qg8/edit?usp=sharing)

# Audio with @Ellinia

The Audio Team has been busy filling Veloren with many of the SFX that help make
a game feel immersive and provide the player with tactical feedback while
exploring. When done right, this kind of work should typically go largely
unnoticed or taken for granted (that means we have done our job!). But we
thought it would be fun to peel back the curtain a bit on some of Veloren's
newest sounds.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/747856953509675139/747859429415845968/SFX_Project_Example.png")
}}

@Eden and I have been gathering foley recordings in a DIY isolation booth
constructed with rockwool insulation absorption panels and utilizing an Audio
Technica AT-2035 condenser microphone. We've done plenty of mixing and
synthesizing plugins in FL Studio as well. SFX that are on their way into
Veloren are:

- new level up sound
- swinging and slashing sounds for the sword, axe, hammer, dagger, shield, and
  staff
- projectile sounds for the bow and a fire shot for the staff
- experience gained sounds

Further down the timeline are:

- snow footsteps
- swimming/splashing
- climbing
- dive roll

When approaching the design of a sound, I often will get right into Veloren and
just think about it from a player's perspective. Sometimes it's easy as swinging
a toy sword in front of a microphone (and adding a knife scrape to it in post).
Other times I have to get a little more creative. For example, the upcoming roll
SFX I have been working on has been a trial of rolling myself, a pile of
clothing wrapped around a hammer, and various other items in an attempt to get a
satisfying combination of body 'thunk' and armor/clothing rustling as the
character hits and rolls on the surface.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/747856953509675139/747860460942000248/EWX7MJ2SUfWv.png")
}}

A lot of sound effect design for me is thinking about how something sounds
within the physics of real-world acoustics. For example, when planning a sound
for an action that carries the player character or another in-world entity away
from a starting position (like the roll), you have to think about how higher and
lower frequencies behave. Lower frequencies are stretched out longer than higher
frequencies. Think about hearing an annoying neighbor's subwoofer. The wall or
the space between you and their home/apartment is often enough to deaden those
higher and mid-range frequencies, but the low-end makes its way to you still. So
when designing something like the roll effect, I apply a low-pass filter to
automatically begin to muffle some of the higher frequencies of the sound. This
adds to the perception of movement within the sound.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/747291354454818956/screenshot_1598238491117.png",
  caption="Cloudy mountains at night. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
