+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 194"
description = "More Halloween planning"

date = 2022-10-17
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-194"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/1029675003261767751/screenshot_1665564007570.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we plan more for the halloween event.

\- Christof, TWiV Contributor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Pfau, @4ydx, @zesterer, @Isse.

## Halloween planning

During this week's meeting we did more planning for the Halloween event:

 - Barren trees are being worked on as part of the citadel branch by @zesterer

 - Discussion of a Halloween boss (Vampire)

 - @Isse has been working on the Halloween branch

 - What can be worked on? Halloween songs in #audio?

 - @Hannibal might be working on a Halloween map location

 - Moving to a [tracking issue](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/issues/1731) for all ideas

 - Working on Halloween town decorations

 - Carved pumpkin model

 - Villager costumes

 - Moon recolouring

 - NPC lantern changes, Green or orange

 - Create a broom model for a glider

 - Town NPCs get a spooky hat

 - NPCs are more inclined to using furry/scary clothing

 - Draugrs spawn in the wild and drop candy

 - Exclusive candy drops, would need the model created

See also [this week's meeting minutes](https://hackmd.io/1rd3-wCnQgy36-VeUQHTcQ).

## Server browser retrospective

### How has it been going?

Overall, many communities have had more visibility on their servers,
It’s quite easy to see nearby servers.
Servers can specity which region they’re in, 
Number of players on the main game server is currently hovering around a reasonable number (~150).

### What are some things we’ve heard people want

Communities want to feel more official, 
    Only the main game server gets a star, and there is only one of them.
Larger communities want methods to share characters between servers.
Player count on servers.
I’d like to be able to see which “federation” I can connect to with my current credentials, and how my characters can be shared across servers,
    This is quite dependent on the new auth system.

### What are the next steps?

Work on the new auth system: 
    Being worked on by @Nadja, @XVar, @Sharp, @imbris…

Work on the player count:
    How are the config/status of the server being shared with Airshipper?

Much is being discussed in this thread: V3650 DRAFT Added Query Server to Veloren Server
    There are issues of servers just sharing arbitrary information

### Plugins by @Christof

I work on extending plugins.
So far (MR V3658) I was able to add an item to the game without modifying or adding any file in assets 
and only providing voxel and ron files within assets/plugins/hello.plugin.tar.

Sadly this alone is of less value as:
- sadly you can't build wasm modules in master (so the archive won't load), combined with socksonme/suggin_plugin_debuggin it loads
- modules are not yet automatically downloaded to a client
- no support for loot and crafting (so no way to get the items in the plugin as a normal user)

Example plugin:
```
-rwxrwxr-x christof/christof 302432 2022-10-09 21:26 hello.wasm
-rw-rw-r-- christof/christof 544 2022-10-16 19:14 plugin.toml
-rw-rw-r-- christof/christof 157 2022-10-16 17:56 assets/voxygen/item_image_manifest.ron
-rw-rw-r-- christof/christof 23027 2022-10-16 17:56 assets/voxygen/voxel/weapon/tool/paddle.vox
-rw-rw-r-- christof/christof   142 2022-10-16 17:56 assets/voxygen/voxel/biped_weapon_manifest.ron
-rw-rw-r-- christof/christof   467 2022-10-16 17:56 assets/common/items/weapons/tool/paddle.ron
```
{{ img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/1031262244715122738/unknown.png", caption="Sneak preview, the dithering of the wood is still sketchy")}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/1031012607253024788/screenshot_1665880531649.png",
    caption="A witch living in the woods. See you next week!") 
}}

{{ support() }}
