+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 115"
description = "Audio, financials"

date = 2021-04-12
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-115"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/830519909032394802/veloren-voxygen_QN6B90jB9X.jpg"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, lots of work has been done on combat audio. We also take a deep dive
into Veloren's financials, as well as a newly-provisioned dedicated server.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @Ceikry, @XVar, @juliancoffee,
@Sam, @VincentFoulon80, @Sharp, @Pfau, @aweinstock, @DaforLynx, @law4x, @hqurve,
@imbris, @BuildTools, @Snowram, @mdx97, @davidruizagustin2002, @ccm7676,
@UMR1352, @zesterer, @Desttinghim, @romulans, @James, and @kimamb!

This month's Rust Gamedev blog is out, be sure to [check it
out](https://gamedev.rs/news/020/)!

@Sam overhauled loot tables to allow them to recursively reference other loot
tables in addition to items. @Destinghim added travelers back into the game and
made them follow paths. @Ceikry added a setting for resetting inputs when chat
is opened. They also added ctrl-click and shift-click info to item tooltips when
trading, and updated the book slightly. @Ceikry also improved trading sanity by
making sure the server denies active trades in the case that a player logs out
during a trade.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/831305200903782440/screenshot_1617614846849.png")
}}

@Ultimafounding has some plans for some new music in the next few weeks. There
is also a lot of other audio content coming in from @Flashbang, @DaforLynx,
@Aeronic, @badbbad, and @alfy. Songs have also been revamped for distribution
over biomes.

@Pfau has been working on some new map mode button visuals. @aweinstock made
villagers, guards, and merchants able to drink potions and eat food.

@juliancoffee fixed a bug in localization tests which caused them to incorrectly
find lines of keys in `.ron` files. Now if tests are showing that there are some
untranslated fields, they are really untranslated and not just a false positive.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/725508097233125407/830611549826580480/unknown.png")
}}

## Combat Audio by @aweinstock

I extended the music system to support combat music. Previously, there was an
activity field for the soundtracks that could be either `Explore` or `Combat`,
but nothing was making use of the `Combat` state. With my changes, the field is
now `music_state`, and can be either `Activity(x)` or `Transition(x, y)`, where
x and y are in `{Explore, Combat(Low), Combat(High)}`.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/830187018960502814/unknown.png")
}}

The system tracks how many nearby hostile enemies there are, and heuristically
determines whether the player is in combat, and if so, how intense the combat
is, to select a track to play (and the corresponding transition snippet for that
track). Currently, the only combat music is @DaforLynx's "Barred Paths", which
plays in dungeons, but the system is general enough to support another biome,
site, and time-of-day dependent combat music.

## Veloren financials by @AngelOnFira

Recently, another big push was made towards provisioning our own dedicated
server for Veloren's general use. Currently, we have a cloud server at Hetzner
that we use to host the game server, as well as a server in Digital Ocean to
host our auth, Airshipper CDN, and some other items.

The idea of this dedicated server is that it will allow us to lay the
foundations for future federated server clusters all around the world. As the
project grows, more players will want to play on the servers, and geo-located
hardware will be necessary. Further, the number of services that Veloren makes
use of will also go up. Here is a list of some items:

```
- Website
- Wiki
- Book
- Auth
- Airshipper CDN
- Veloren test server
- CI
- Grafana
- Prometheus
- Main game server
- Discourse
```

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/831337741685882940/veloren-voxygen_edNRcS9ddb.jpg")
}}

Now not all of these items need to be hosted by us, and many are distributed,
like CI. But historically these have all been hosted on donated compute from the
contributors. Lots of this can be re-deployed onto a dedicated server.

After doing an audit of how our financials are looking month to month, I created
a spreadsheet that should encompass everything. This process helped clear up a
few discrepancies:

- The amount we're paying for bandwidth from Digital Ocean will increase further
  if we keep using their CDN.
- A mistake was made in several previous Digital Ocean invoices, which has been
  since resolved.
- Many of our services are distributed over many different servers that aren't
  nessessarily controlled by the Veloren core team.
- We had no tracking of our monthly revenue, compared to how much we spend in
  operation costs.

You can check out the [spreadsheet
here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Fk6kDsCdZLhVszXdsWUjoG4Cgc3cLbTqJgZ-gY3Ndq0/edit#gid=0).
I also created a more formal proposal and reasoning document for the dedicated
server. You can see that [document
here](https://www.notion.so/Veloren-Dedicated-Server-Hetzner-AX51-NVMe-39491161e28a4d6dbd77e96c18919059).
Hopefully, this financial progress can help lead us to have a better handle
while we move forward on further server provisioning.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/831385645830242314/unknown.png",
  caption="A small fire at night")
}}

{{ support() }}
