+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 183"
description = ""

date = 2022-07-04
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-183"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/1003275544231682089/screenshot_1659269912888.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have a great writeup from @Sharp about optimizations being made to
the site2 system.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Isse, @xMAC94x, and @LunarEclipse

# Worldgen settings by @juliancoffee

I implemented a new setting for worldgen, `LoadOrGenerate`. Previously you needed
to use `Save` options to generate a new map and save it on disk with some cryptic
name (it's actually the date of map generation). Then, when you would want to use it
next time, you would need to use `Load` option to load your map and pass it that
cryptic name, unless you renamed it yourself.

Now with `LoadOrGenerate` you don't need to care about it all, you can just say
`LoadOrGenerate("my-cool-map")` and things will work automatically. You can pass
optional parameters, like map size and scale hack, the same way you would do
that with Save or Generate option, read about it in The Book. If you specify new
parameters and a name for the map with old parameters, worldgen will panic, if you
will want to overwrite the map, you can use overwrite parameter. Ask us on
Discord if you will have some troubles with it.

Also, to give an update on my previous post about translation, I am actively
researching [Fluent project](https://projectfluent.org/) and it will be just
a warp-jump for our translation capabilities. Probably no web-service UI yet
though.

[Here is RFC about the translation
 move](https://gitlab.com/juliancoffee/kotygoroshko/-/blob/veloren-rfc/RFC.md).
Read this, if you're translating Veloren to your language because quite soon
that will be the way to translate the game.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/1000612174286311505/Capture.PNG",
    caption="How are we gonna get up this? See you next week!") }}

{{ support() }}
