+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 150"
description = "150th Devblog"

date = 2021-12-13
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-150"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/922609480573792276/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, it's the 150th Veloren blog!

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @a1phyr, @zesterer, @tygyh, @Sam, @James,
@holychowders, @xMAC94x, and @EvenMeek!

## 150 Devblogs by @AngelOnFira

It's that time again; a large milestone in the number of blog posts we've
released! Every 50 editions tend to be close enough to a year that it can act
as a recap for everything that happened in the previous year. This milestone
doesn't feel nearly as momentous as the 50th edition, however, there are new
achievements that are being reached.

For example, we finally had a release party that broke out of the loop of
"server crashing during release party under the player load". We've also reached
amazingly high numbers of players on the server not during a release party,
which was around 90 people. We've also completed phenomenal systems that players
can interact with what we've aspired to have since starting development of the
game. 10,000 commits, 10,000 members on our Discord server, 9,000 members on the
subreddit, and the 7th most starred project on GitLab. There's a lot we have going on!

Normally, I use every 50th blog post to write something much larger, but I
didn't have a lot of time to prepare something this week. Hopefully, we can see
something large for the end of the year post. See you at episode 200 for the
next TWiV milestone!

## Devblog Recap by @Dalyc

Be sure to check out last week's devblog recap by @Dalyc if you missed it!

{{ youtube(id="1KLvFVJ0_WE")}}

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/918209792500195348/screenshot_1638988531654.png",
    caption="A peaceful city on the water. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
