+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 103"
description = "The Florabite, CI"

date = 2021-01-18
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-103"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307708146581519/801973331750158347/103.jpg"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see lots of new art coming into Veloren. Skill trees have been
merged. @Christof continues his weekly writeups on economic simulation. @Yakei
talks about new improvements to CI.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @ccgauche, @XVar, @Pfau, @imbris,
@SWilliamsGames, @xMAC94x, @James, and @ubruntu!

@Rotsuoy and @Sarra_Kitty worked together to get some new items into the game.
@Sam has been going through a lot of code review for skill trees. There are new
bugs and issues to resolve now that it's been released. @James figured out what
was causing NPCs to spam chat messages when fleeing and fixed it. @Songtronix
worked on getting partial downloads working.

## The Florabite by @Rotsuoy

I'm a new contributor and for my first big contribution I started tackling items
that didn't have in-game models. I started working on models for critters as
well, mostly variants of existing monsters like a green dragon and forest drake.
I've also started working on a new monster, the Florabite, designed by my 9 year
old daughter who also loves Veloren! So you can definitely say that multiple
generations of people already adore the game!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/282295259445198849/800403746102050886/unknown.png")
}}

## Trade Between Sites with @Christof

Starting from last week's state of reading professions/raw materials/products
from a `.ron` file, I added uncontrolled land as a raw material and trading good
(fief/tenure). I also added and included different types of guards for different
types of ground/water (e.g. a Naval Guard needs more potions, but less Armor)
which then produce `Farmland`, `Quarry`, `FishingGround`... In turn, this
enables normal workers to access resources there, producing the raw materials
for their food.

Having different types of Guards enabled the town's control board to (re-)assign
tasks according to changing needs. This resulted in much more people living in
the same city, due to a smarter usage of the same natural resources. Also, I
designed a concept for trading between sites that take local prices on both
sides into account. Merchants plan their wares according to the information from
the last trip and local stocks and prices, then at the distant market updated
local prices and stock amounts apply, so merchants will come back with new
information and potentially a different amount than planned for.

Coin will act as a generic ware (without other use) when direct exchange is not
desirable. Unfortunately, both the planning and the auction will involve
non-linear multi-dimensional (one dimension per ware) optimization.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/282295259445198849/800403798156640276/unknown.png",
    caption="New items by @Rotsuoy")
}}

## CI Improvements With @Yakei

For my first real contribution, I decided to work on the CI. Pipelines can take
as long as an hour, which is definitely too long. The current system makes use
of a cache that is manually built into the Docker image. This has several
problems, the main one being the cache gets outdated fast when it comes to
Veloren's rapid development.

I decided to leverage Gitlab CI's cache system to remove this factor. This
system is fairly new, or at least not as stable as we would all like it to be.
In fact, some of the main features I've used to reduce build time are still
broken on the last LTS version, which means I'm using a release candidate
version that was built about a week ago.

Once I overcame this first hurdle, I found out the average time spent creating
and extracting the cache for each step was very significant. This is due to the
default golang zip library used by the runner. I swapped this out to fastzip
with a feature flag and found negligible overhead, compared to entire multiple
minutes before.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/282295259445198849/800385525961457664/snap2021-01-17-10-25-12.png",
    caption="Forest Drake")
}}

The new workflow is the following:

- The Docker image is created when dependencies are changed (either by adding,
  removing, or upgrading them).
- Each step, the cache is extracted to the compilation folder.
- We iterate through the container cache and link each of the dependencies. This
  requires some overhead, but is needed as this step will always be called after
  the extraction of Gitlab's cache. This means we cannot link an entire folder.
- The normal step is now executed. Cargo will now take care of only changed
  source files, and compilation completes much faster.
- When finished, the new cache is created if changes were detected. This
  workflow means only Veloren's modified source files will be compiled on CI.

While these improvements have mostly been completed, we have not yet decided on
the cache policy that we will use. Recent talks with @xMAC94x and @XVar leads me
to think we would introduce a cache only created on master and used on every
branch, along with a special cache for Tarpaulin and benchmark. This policy
ensures a decent max storage size on cache, as well as reducing again overhead
on the cache by not creating a new cache on branches. We would also change
benchmark and/or coverage behavior to manually trigger on branches as this is
the main cause of time spent in pipelines.

A lot of questions aren't completely answered for now (the correct git clean
policy to adopt as we use fetch instead of clone, how to reduce link creation
overhead, etc.), but I think the new CI should be ready either this week or
next.

I'm already seeing build times reduced by around 5 to 15 minutes. Hopefully we
can stabilize runs to around 5 - 8 minutes each if we change benchmark +
coverage to manually trigger on branch which is probably as good as we can get
on this matter. My next goal will be to reduce the number of dependencies that
Veloren uses and improve linking time.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/801657551196127262/d2e39bc1b71a1863eb0d8f7635eb777b.png",
    caption="A short break from exploring. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
