+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 75"
description = ""

date = 2020-07-06
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-75"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/729627191532453888/unknown-44.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

Welcome to the longest Veloren blog post so far! This week we hear from @xMAC94x
about the network switchover. @imbris discusses an interesting bug. @zesterer
overhauled pathfinding and wrote about how it's better. @Sharp shares some
insights about how GUIDs might not always be the best. Timo went hiking and biking.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @xMAC94x, @lobster, @Songtronix,
@imbris, @ProTheory8, @Slipped, @Snowram, @Qutrin, @AngelOnFira, @XVar, @Sam,
@Pfau, @KevinGlasson, @Nancok, @theduke, @Patro, @Redo11,and  @Swedneck!

There is a new [Rust gamedev
newsletter](https://rust-gamedev.github.io/posts/newsletter-011/) to check out!
@Pfau also has [a new
edition](https://www.patreon.com/posts/weekly-blog-no-5-38924509) of his weekly
Veloren art blog. The team met this last weekend for a 0.6 halfway meeting.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/730229799964115065/knockback.gif",
  caption="Testing knockback values on a new hammer attack")
}}

@Songtronix fixed an error with preventing [the book](https://book.veloren.net/)
from working with Zola 0.4.1. The art team worked on improving spell and attack
icons. They decided on a colour code system for icon backgrounds so that the
player instantly knows what category it is in. For example, red means physical,
while green means healing.

Qutrin implemented a loot table system which allows choosing drop rates for
items. @lobster was working on one-handed weapon fixes, and started working on
particle effects. @WelshPixie had to resort to proofreading lore docs since
there is currently a technical block on adding lots of sprites like she wanted.
@Snowram helped @Slipped to finish the quadruped rework.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/729672796355166318/unknown.png",
  caption="Skunk by @Gemu")
}}

@XVar the foundational backend implementation of skills and skill groups, and is
now waiting for game design to come in with some preliminary skills to get into
the game. @Gemu has been making progress on the small-quad reworks, such as the
skunk. @Felixader is working on a few things. First is the design description
and history behind the ideals of how the different cultures construct their
cities. Second is cultural design philosophies for items. Finally, he is working
on a structure for writers can format ideas for quests, lore items, and other
writing items. This will have to be discussed with other groups to make sure it
fits nicely.

@Sam finished a new hammer attach which has been merged. They are now working on
a new spinning axe attack. @JackRubino has completed update to the Italian
translation. @Sharp is still hard at work their monumental LoD and shadows
branch, otherwise known as `sharp/small-fixes`. There is hope that this branch
will be merged soon!

{{
  youtube(id="1cxoFSiTYy4")
}}

# Networking Milestone by @xMAC94x

In the blog we've covered a lot about networking recently. Last Friday we
reached a networking milestone. The alternative networking backend got
implemented into Veloren and will be active from now on. While no additional
features are activated yet, everything is prepared to have it enabled seemlessly
in the future.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/729467610311426078/screenshot_1593988638078.png",
  caption="Rolling mountains by @Treeco")
}}

## Network Switchover

The switch itself was quite a success considering it was switching the whole
networking layer under the hood. There were a few problem, however:

- Server had a problem of too much logging which was fixed within an hour of
  discovery
- Clients would panic if the server disconnected them, which was also fixed
  within an hour
- When a clients disconnects from a server they had to wait 20 seconds for the
  timeout before reconnecting

None of those errors caused gamebreaking behavior. Unfortunatly we had a further
difficulty as our network frontend was sending way to much data (10 Mbit/s per
player even on idle). This required lz4 compression to be reenabled to serve
more than 4 players at a time on the official server.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/729756092636201010/unknown.png",
  caption="New icon for the axe skill")
}}

Beside that, we were doing a lot of testing and found multiple other unrelated
bugs in Veloren:

- Some messages from the server were getting dropped for a while now. Additional
  logging is now provided so this can be prevented in the future.
- Entities are no longer in sync when you leave spawn and come back
- Our netcode sends way too many inventory syncs, @imbris pushed a fix on Monday
- Crash due to missing green pants item
- Render distance not adjusted correctly

## Next Steps for Networking

The next steps for Veloren networking are quite clear:

1. Improve stability
2. Work on the great list of stuff to improve from @Songtronix, @zesterer, and
   @imbris
3. Enable the multi-stream channel which will allow faster entity sync transfers
   even while there is a heavy bandwith load
4. Better network statistics in Grafana, which will be beneficial for
   development and release parties
5. Invest in testing and scaling with multiple players (automated tools for high
   player-load tests)
6. Enable the UDP backend, which will decrease latency significantly
7. Network feedback to its ECS systems e.g when bandwith is slow in order to
   reduce a player's tick count. This might enable higher tick servers)

Those steps will be tackled within the next weeks and months, so stay curious 🙂

# The Case of the Disappearing Entities by @imbris

A bug was found that caused entities to randomly vanish. At first, it was
thought to be caused by some NaN in the code or a malfunction in the region
system used to select what entities to sync to each client. This could be
reproduced with the following:

1. Open the game
2. Go from far enough from spawn town that you can't see it
3. Go back to spawn town
4. Try rolling, shooting bow, or spawning entities

The culprit can be seen in the image below. On login the `client` sends its
requested view distance to the `server`. The `server` makes sure that it's
constrained to a maximium allowed view distance. The code handles this by
sending the `client` an updated view distance if it was over the maximum. If you
look carefully at the `map` the two parameters are misordered leading to the
`client` always receiving a message telling it to use the max view distance.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/449654102553788417/729613634862317629/unknown.png")
}}

However, if the `client` initially requested a smaller value the `server` will
still think that is the value being used. Additionally, the view distance in
`voxygen` is never updated because the `client` uses an event returned from
`tick` to inform `voxygen` of this change. At the time of the bug, `voxygen`
ignored all events from the `client` while in this screen because they were
previously not relevant.

So we end up with a scenario where the `server` and `voxygen` both have the
selected view distance, say 10, while the `client` thinks the view distance is
the max configured on the `server`, say 30. Thus, the terrain renders as you
would expect but the `client` doesn't unload chunks farther out since they are
still within the view distance that it knows.

However, these chunks are unloaded on the `server` since it sees them as being
outside the `client`'s view distance. Then, once the player goes back to the
spawn town they will see the terrain chunks that the `client` held on to but the
`client` won't request the `server` to reload them. Additionally, since the area
is not actually loaded on the `server` any non-player entities will be deleted.

# Pathfinding with @zesterer

I made a bunch of changes to pathfinding this week. The biggest improvements
come from three places: heuristic modifications, velocity alignment, and cubic
spline motion planning. Previously, pathfinding worked something like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730404219936309328/unknown.png")
}}

Getting from A to B used the A\* algorithm with a basic distance heuristic. This
resulted in paths that felt a bit odd. Enemies wouldn't run towards you in
straight lines and pets would make bizarre robotic movements in order to catch
up with you. This happens because the pathfinding only considers the most
'locally' efficient path to the goal: and since it can only consider the 8
neighbouring blocks, the best it can do is to choose the block that moves
closest to the target from the source block.

To solve this problem I modified the pathfinding heuristic to make A* prefer to
use paths that are closer to a straight line to the target. This means that they
now prefer paths that are shorter from the perspecive of an agent that that can
move freely rather than one that can only do King moves in chess. This
adjustment to the heuristic is actually very small: in most decisions it has
almost no impact, but it's enough to act as a tie-breaker between two options
that appear to both be optimal from the local perspective. The result is that it
now produces paths that look like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730405206474489897/unknown.png")
}}

This feels a lot more natural: enemies run towards you in relatively straight
lines, as do pets. However, there were still problems. In fact, this method
introduces even more problems. Agents follow path nodes one at a time, aiming
for the centre of each block. This resulted in lots of small turns appearing in
the paths agents took. Where the old system created paths with lots of straight
lines like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730405683001950338/unknown.png")
}}

The new system created paths with lots of small turns like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730405853437362216/unknown.png")
}}

This results in a lot of jerky movement: agents zig-zagging as their run, and a
lot of ugly rapid rotation. To alleviate this problem I came up with another
solution. I realised that the primary problem was that agents were aiming for
the centre of each block and that the resulting motion would look much smoother
if the agent instead aimed for the 'most convenient' position to hit within that
block.

'Most convenient' can be a little hard to pin down, but a very good
approxixmation of it can be found by looking at the agent's current velocity
vector. The most convenient position within a block will be that which requires
the least deviation from the current velocity to reach. This might initially
seem like a daunting problem: agents move with smooth movement using
floating-point numbers, so the number of points in the block to consider would
be, in practical terms, infinite.

However, this actually boils down to a simple linear optimisation problem. It
turns out that an optimal solution will always appear on the edge of the block.
To solve this, we can instead just find the intersection between the current
velocity vector and the line that represents each edge of the block. The result
is that we can achieve smooth motion even if the pathfinding itself remains
grid-aligned. As a result, the path the agent actually takes looks like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730407757290930304/unknown.png")
}}

There's a secondary advantage that comes with this technique too. As it turns
out, considering diagonal blocks makes pathfinding much more expensive. This is
because validating that a diagonal block is accessible first requires that
determining that at least one of the two blocks adjacent to the source and
target blocks is accessible as well. This adds a lot of overhead to pathfinding.

The original reason for adding diagonal pathfinding was to create smoother
paths: but this new technique blows diagonal pathfinding out of the water for
that! As a result, we can actually remove the diagonal pathfinding and get away
with adjacent cardinal pathfinding instead. The result of this is a path that
looks like this:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730409061924995093/unknown.png")
}}

Although this path has more nodes than the previous one, it's also much faster
to find (it might also be possible to do post-processing cleanup on it
afterwards but to be honest this isn't really needed due to the aforementioned
velocity-alignment pass). The result of this is that pathfinding has become a
lot faster and can do more useful work per frame. This allowed me to up the
per-frame pathfinding iteration budget significantly meaning that agents
discover complex paths in far fewer frames than they previously could.

Lastly, I noticed some problem with the new animals. Many new animals, such as
wolves, got introduced recently. I wanted to make them (and other creatures)
feel a bit more natural so I added per-species movement speeds. The problem is
that wolves now run at almost twice the speed that they used to: and the
existing pathfinding code simply couldn't cope. It tended to overshoot path
nodes, understeer on corners (leading to wolves falling off a lot of things),
and it turned them into terrible hill climbers since they kept moving too fast
down slopes, causing them to fall and hurt themselves.

The previous approach to pathfinding involved moving in a dead-straight line
towards the next path node. This worked fine for slower animals but, as
mentioned, breaks down completely here. The agents would attempt to follow the
following path:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730411634014814308/unknown.png")
}}

But in practice, this didn't take into account the reality of their own
momentum, which resulted in them taking something closer to this path:

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730412018724503652/unknown.png")
}}

I reality, this problem was even worse: wolves would willingly hurl themselves
off narrow paths to their deaths with surprising vigor. To counter this problem,
I made them decide on a movement direction by constructing a cubic bezier spline
(i.e: a curve) that took into account the following things:

1) The agent's current position
2) The agent's current velocity
3) The positions of the next two nodes

The result of this is a curve that goes from the agent's position to the `n +
1th` node in the path, but curves to take into account the current velocity (to
keep movement smooth in the general case) and the nth node (to avoid erroneously
cutting corners).

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/730413471421956157/unknown.png")
}}

This seems to work quite well for keeping movement smooth but unfortunately it
doesn't help slow agents down on corners to avoid their untimely death. To solve
that problem, I added one last feature: agents now regulate their movement speed
by taking the cubic path tangent a little into the future and performing a dot
product against their current movement direction. This slows the agent down if
their current movement direction deviates significantly from the direction of
the path that they'll soon be needing to take. This, for the most part, solves
the problem.

It's not a perfect solution: it doesn't (and shouldn't - agents shouldn't always
have access to this information) take into account the physical properties of
the world around them - friction with the ground, air resistance, their own
movement capabilities, etc. - but it's good enough that agents move in a manner
that feels relatively reliable and realistic.

I've also made a tonne of extra tweaks to pathfinding, too small to mention
here, but these 3 changes were the big ones that had the most significant
impact. There's still more that can be done and I plan to improve pathfinding
further in subsequent feature branches. For now though, this is a significant
improvement.

# GUID Insights by @Sharp

> GUIDs, or UUIDs, are a type of ID that uses 128-bits numbers to identify
> information. GUID stands for "Globabally Unique Identifier", while UUID stands
> for "Universally Unique Identifier". They take the form
> `123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000`. @Sharp and I had a discussion about
> their potential downsides, and the missconception that sequential primary IDs
> are outdated. - @AngelOnFira

First and foremost, this is not arguing that GUIDs should never be used. Rather,
I'm more arguing that you should think carefully about the kind of key you use
and choose the right one for the job. So, basically, the primary issue with
GUIDs is that they're very large and very spread out in key space. These are of
course exactly the properties you want from GUIDs, so this is a fundamental
tension.

Any methods that rely on data being "almost sorted" or the ability to quickly
find a page on the hard drive containing a GUID will not work. For pretty much
any index type other than a hash index, you are going to have pathological
behavior for any update operation you care to think of as a result.

Secondly, due to the space increase, foreign keys and indices are larger (often
4x or more larger). This makes it much harder to normalize your database and get
good performance. I've found many instances where people told me they had to
denormalize their database for performance, but it turned out to just be about
GUID overuse.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/730243903365578772/spin.gif",
  caption="New axe spin attack by @Sam")
}}

This also applies to other operations like aggregation. Even if they don't need
to touch the GUID column, they're slower because they need to read more
information from disk. Note: this doesn't apply to OLAP databases with column
storage, but these are usually not what's used for most applications during
regular operations.

So you're paying a very large penalty on essentially every operation on your
database other than nested hash lookups for the privilege of using GUIDs. The
nested hash lookups, while the only available query plan in a lot of key value
stores, are often suboptimal for industry-strength relational databases.

There are other performance concerns as well. Often, host languages have even
worse support for GUIDs than the database; in many dynamic languages the GUIDs
end up being read as strings. This introduces substantial serialization,
network, and parsing overhead over integers (and it's measurable).

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/730244977606787072/screenshot_1593904483926.png",
  caption="Work on @Sharp's shadows")
}}

One thing that's often argued in favor of GUIDs is that it's virtually
impossible that they will ever overlap. However, most databases will want you to
create a primary key anyway which guarantees uniqueness, so this advantage
doesn't really benefit you except in a very distributed context. Moreover, the
advantage is very easy to get with mostly-sequential IDs too; you just include a
"core" or "machine" identifier in your generated ID.

This still produces compact IDs in the same local domain, but without requiring
synchronization. This can also be extended to secure contexts; IDs are
sequential within an organization or other security domain. Since your security
should never be based on someone knowing a particular ID value in the first
place, this also encourages much better secure design (in my experience). People
who rely on GUIDs have a tendency to assume that, since it's so unlikely that
they could be guessed, they themselves function as a security barrier. They
forget about all the side channels through which they can be passed.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/730233852643246161/screenshot_1594171489107.png",
  caption="Starry night by @Treeco")
}}

GUIDs excel where loose synchronization is needed and there isn't a centralized
registry, or where the GUID can do double duty (for example as a hash of its
contents). Git is a database that would make absolutely no sense with sequential
IDs. GUIDs of some sort (or at least, much larger keys) can also be really
useful in a database with a different mechanism for achieving performance. For
example, a distributed key value stores. However, they will still not achieve
nearly the kind of performance that a small-key-optimized one can no matter how
much you scale out, but they can often store far more data.

However, even then, it's useful to be able to specify ranges so that you can
redirect key lookups to the correct partition without having to do a full hash
lookup. This kind of value based partitioning scheme works best when values with
high locality are clustered. So just doing a global GUID is usually not the best
approach even there.

Anyway yeah, for a tiny database or a system that doesn't get much traffic, I
realize this is mostly academic. I just have seen way too many people get bitten
by GUID performance and not realize it. I think a lot of people assume that
sequential IDs are outdated and GUIDs are just categorically better now. At
least that's the impression I've gotten. It's mostly that idea I want to fight
back against.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/730165756070723705/screenshot_1594155004479.png",
  caption="Ocean of Clouds by @SoullessTeacloth. See you next week!")
}}

Support our devs!

[Veloren Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren)

@Pfau: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/pfau)

@Songtronix: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/songtronix)

@YuriMomo: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/YuriMomo)

@xMAC94x: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/xmac94x)

@Acrimon: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/acrimon)
