+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 153"
description = "Daggers, bubbling rivers"

date = 2022-01-03
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-153"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/923409920370573342/screenshot_1640228402639.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

New week, new year! We hear about upcoming fixes to daggers, and hear the audio
changes that are being made to rivers.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @DaforLynx, @imbris, @XVar, @tygyh,
@UncomfySilence, @xMAC94x, @Ubruntu, @AngelOnFira, and @flo!

This week, @AngelOnFira worked on fixing the Github mirror of the project. It
turns out that there was a bug in the most recent version of `git-lfs`. On the
game server-side, the `entity_sync` system was reworked to become parallel! This
was a large issue that came up during the last release party. Once 150+ players
were on the server, it started taking more time each tick than any other system.
Hopefully, we get to test the improvements at the next release!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/449650240350453760/924958659161751642/unknown.png")
}}

## Lunar New Year by @AngelOnFira

With the Christmas holiday event just ending, we're looking forward to the next
event, Lunar New Year 2022. However, our dev team doesn't have many people who
celebrate this holiday. Because of this, we'd like to get more help on this!

If you'd like to help us get this event ready, feel free to join the effort in
the #aesthetics channel on our Discord server. This can include music,
decorations, information, and any other ideas. Give me a ping if you want to get
involved!

## Daggar animations by @Ubruntu

This week, I worked on dagger animations.

I started with some experimentation using the live reloading feature `cargo run
--features "hot-anim"`. I did some investigation into why daggers had such a
different orientation on character models compared to all other weapons. I
couldn't find a reason in the animation code itself, so I opened the dagger
`.vox` models in MagicaVoxel and found that they were horizontal whereas all
other weapon models were positioned vertically.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/925524175131652147/daggers_wielded.jpg",
    size="50")
}}

This was my first time using MagicaVoxel but I managed to rotate the models to
the same orientation as other weapons, and after that, it was a matter of
playing with orientations in the animation files to make them look naturally
positioned on the character model. I took some artistic liberty and positioned
the daggers at the hip instead of across the back like other weapons and that
received some positive feedback. I also tied the "tempbasic" dagger attack skill
to a basic swing animation that one-handed swords use, just for the time being.

Daggers still aren't acquirable normally in the game and still aren't as
polished as other weapons but now they definitely don't feel as "under
construction" as they were before. At this point, however, players can spawn
them with commands in singleplayer and try them out. We can now start to think
of making new dagger .vox models and NPCs that use daggers as weapons, as well
as work on animations for attacks that will use these cool weapons.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/925524174632534026/dagger_sheathed.jpg",
    size="50")
}}

## @DaforLynx

This week, I worked on re-implementing sounds of flowing water for rivers.
Before this feature was removed a while ago, it sounded very sparse and rather
un-riverlike. I took a different approach this time, making small bubbling
sounds emit from a single random water block every tick. The result is that
rivers sound a bit like a babbling brook now, and it gets appropriately louder
as you get closer.

Also, new town music by @phoenix13032005 and @Thy-SFX-[Velorian]- was added.

{{
    video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/929835679737868339/ezgif.com-gif-maker.mp4")
}}

<hr>

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/925795190105604156/Bildschirmfoto_2021-12-29_um_17.53.48.png",
    caption="What's this ship doing here?! See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
