+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 110"
description = "Fireworks, sceptre, and trade"

date = 2021-03-08
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-110"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/539518074106413056/820683347269124136/hlozA6yij7Tmpt-YSZi88Mn_aJ6zUIjZyEIa5u533mI.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, final changes are merged as code freeze approaches. There are updates
to the sceptre, fireworks, and economics.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @Frinksy, @zesterer, @ccgauche,
@Synis, @Pfau, @Sarra_Kitty, @aweinstock, @Sam, @imbris, @Snowram,
@VincentFoulon, @Sharp, @Quibble, @James, @Slipped, @Tadabito, @XVar, and
@heyzoos!

@ccgauche and @xMAC94x have been updating the plugin ECS access to enable more
parallelisation in systems and increase general game scalability. @Sarra_Kitty
and @aweinstock made improvements to the fireworks code. @Christof has been
continuing work on economic trade, with NPCs deciding value of their trades.
@Sam has been working on (another) sceptre overhaul.

### Fireworks with @Sarra_Kitty and @aweinstock

#### Shader code by @Sarra_Kitty

I did a minor tweak on the shader code for fireworks, which gave them a proper
colorful explosion, as the particles before, did not actually have the right
colors for each firework. I also added a white-colored firework into the mix.
@aweinstock did some more substantial work on the fireworks, they now explode
into multiple bursts of color, recursively.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/818486341838831666/screenshot_1615212710612.png")
}}

#### Recursive Fireworks @aweinstock

I extended fireworks to shoot copies of themselves recursively, to give them the
effect of staged payloads.

Both before and after, throwing a firework launches an entity with high initial
velocity that is subject to gravity. It triggers an effect when its vertical
velocity goes below 0 (i.e. it slows down due to gravity, and detonates at the
peak).

Previously, the trigger used `ServerEvent::Destroy` to destroy the projectile,
and `ServerEvent::Explosion` to make an explosion (which uses the same machinery
as the staff explosions; apparently, fireworks do 5 damage per explosion, so
they're a reasonable anti-air weapon if you have enough of them).

I added a `ServerEvent::Shoot` event to shoot additional fireworks when the
vertical velocity trigger is met. The `Shoot` event had to be extended with a
`comp::object::Object` field, since it was previously only used for projectiles,
which only have triggers when they hit an entity or block, (as opposed to
fireworks, which have the vertical velocity trigger, and bombs, which trigger
when they land on a surface). Relatedly, inventory-launched fireworks don't
currently go through `Shoot`, so they don't have a `Projectile` component, which
means they don't trigger when they hit a wall or entity. This can be seen at the
14 minute mark of @SavvyNik's [recent
stream](https://youtu.be/WtjsSXdJjIE?t=840).

To avoid runaway exponential growth with self-replicating fireworks, a firework
has a 25% chance to shoot 2 additional fireworks, and a 45% chance to shoot 1
additional firework. This gives a 70% chance for each firework to replicate at
least once (so you'll get a decent show from most usages of the item), and an
average replication rate of 95% (which is less than 100%, so the show will
almost certainly stop eventually).

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/820673149905403904/ezgif.com-video-to-gif.gif")
}}

### Economic decisions @Christof

I was finally able to combine item rarity, economy's prices, and both
inventories inside the agent code and decide whether to accept the trade or more
value is needed. Sadly the agent doesn't yet know how to give the second
confirmation and the item rarity table needs more balancing.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/818624022186950666/unknown.png")
}}

First acceptance. Of course, all towns always need more food - if they had more
the population would grow.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/818624672236044288/unknown.png")
}}

### Scepter overhaul @Sam

I've overhauled the sceptre (again), it should merge in the next few days. The
projectile heal is removed and the beam is split. There is also now a skillbar
ability.

- New M1: A beam that damages enemies with a bit of lifesteal
- New M2: A beam that heals allies, at the cost of stamina and combo
- New skillbar ability: An aura that provides damage reduction to you and group
  members in range for a short duration

The skill tree for the sceptre has also been redone to account for the new
skills. You'll have all the points that you've invested reset (meaning if you
earned 34 points, and spent any number of them, you'll now have all 34 of those
points available to spend again).

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/819462205208526858/screenshot_1614638991321.png",
  caption = "Fog over a village in the morning. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
