+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 107"
description = "Trade Systems"

date = 2021-02-15
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-107"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/813190001013162014/drs5no5qjjh61.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we had a general meeting to discuss the 0.9 release. Progress is
moving forward on the trade front, both for NPC simulation and for
player-to-player.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @lboklin, @AdaLovegirls, @imbris,
@aweinstock, @zesterer, @Snowram, @Slipped, @DaforLynx, @Sarra_Kitty, @Quellus,
@Quibble, and @Sam!

This week, @Songtronix got the barebones for partial downloads done.
@AngelOnFira got the repo mirror to Github fully working, so now any updates are
sent over once an hour. @Snowram added a new batch of NPCs made by @Gemu and got
NPC recolouring working for non-player models. The art and asset working group
also had a meeting and settled on a list of craft materials for balancing
purposes.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/810934154589765682/screenshot_1613412119430.png",
    caption="NPC recolouring work")
}}

@Christof got the inter-site trade code working and implemented a naming
recommendation by @zesterer. A general meeting was held to primarily determine
the release date of 0.9. It was decided that it would happen on Saturday, March
20th. You can read the meeting minutes
[here](https://www.notion.so/General-meeting-Sunday-the-14th-6d82da8616284b5db8fd0e9ed73a2696).

## Update on Dual Wielding by @Sam

I've started work on dual wielding, mostly backend stuff to more easily support
it:

```
- Weapons now have a Hands field on them
- The check for having the prerequisite skill for a skillbar ability is no
  longer hardcoded
- Handedness of the weapon automatically multiplies weapon power and speed, in
  the current iteration:
    - Two-handed weapons multiply power by 150% and speed by 75%
    - One-handed weapons multiply power by 67% and speed by 133%
- Wielding a single one-handed properly accesses its abilities (the initial test
  for dual wielding a few months ago required that 2 one-handed weapons be
  equipped to use a secondary ability)
- Dual wielding weapons gives access to skillbar abilities from both weapons
- Weapon tooltips will display the handedness of the weapons
```

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/810885968780984363/screenshot_1613400613799.png")
}}

## Player Trading by @aweinstock

I implemented player-to-player trading (bound to the R key by default). Trade
has two phases. In the first, either player can add and remove items from their
offers. In the second, the trade is made unmodifiable for review before
acceptance. Both players have to agree to the trade before it can be
reviewed/accepted. The server-side component of this should be generic enough to
be usable for NPC trade. Currently, the AI just declines all trade attempts.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/810852480757399552/screenshot_1613392628654.png",
    caption="A valley to fly through. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
