+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 94"
description = "Visual Improvements"

date = 2020-11-16
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-94"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/777300698701889566/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we have a lot of content. Lots of work has been done in preparation
for the upcoming 0.8 launch. @zesterer goes over lots of the work he's been
doing on many systems. @imbris talks about the transition work from conrod to iced.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Knarkzel, @imbris, @xMAC94x,
@zesterer, @XVar, @Treeco, @JasonLee, @Pfau, Yusdacra, @CapsizeGlimmer, and
@Slipped!

Veloren will be speaking at MiniDebConf this weekend! It will be at 18:30 GMT+0
on Sunday, the 22nd of November. You can find out more about it
[here](https://mdco2.mini.debconf.org/talks/8-community-game-development-in-rust-a-biopsy/)!

@Eden made a new song for the ocean biome. @Knarkzel fixed a bug where you could
spam special attacks on certain weapons while out of stamina. @Snowram added
some new animals and made overworld spawns saner with the help of @zesterer's
new spawning system. Hopefully, this should be ready real soon. @Snowram also
made a slight correction to NPC stats so they don't fire beams from their chest
or their crotch. @Gemu modeled the animals that @Snowram put in.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/779043046792626266/screenshot_1605764656810.png")
}}

@Christof developed a hotfix for broken persistence, which then got replaced by
a much better solution the next evening. @Christof had a lengthy discussion with
@zesterer about the complex economic simulation in Veloren. @Christof hopes to
make NPCs at least talk about local prices and stock amounts in the next few
weeks.

@Sam moved all weapon abilities from code to `ron` files, which allows for them
to be more modifiable as tweaking values won't require a complete recompile.
@Sam also began work on skill trees. There was already a skeleton of a system
implemented by @XVar which allowed for multiple skill groups, and for skills to
be associated with each. To that, @Sam made it so that XP is properly split
between skill groups, and so that skill points are automatically earned when
reaching a threshold of XP.

@XVar continued to work on the modular inventory/loadout feature and got
sidetracked into refactoring a lot of how `Loadout` is used externally around
the codebase. @James and @Slipped worked on a bunch of cool animal attacks and
AI for them.

@James also added a biome specific music system which can weight songs based on
their likelihood to play in a given biome. They made it possible to have cave
and dungeon specific songs and added a bunch of ambient sfx by emitting sfx from
blocks. They removed the `SfxEvent` bus in the ECS in favor of simply playing
the sfx from voxygen, where the code is already, and finally added a wind sfx
system.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/778969277184737290/unknown.png")
}}

# 0.8 Release Schedule

Veloren will be releasing 0.8 next weekend, on the 28th. To prepare for this,
the project will go into code freeze on the 24th. Keep an eye out for the
stability testing; we need lots of people to find potential bugs in the version
we'll release!

```
2020-11-24 18:00 Feature freeze - At this point no features will be merged
2020-11-25 18:00 Public Stability Testing with many people
2020-11-26 18:00 NEW - relaxed 0.7 throwback event
2020-11-27 18:00 Fixes freeze - Nothing will be merged except gamebreaking fixes
2020-11-28 09:00 Final Build
2020-11-28 12:00 Prepare a Release Server
2020-11-28 18:00 Release Party
```

# Veloren Screenshot & Trailer Competition

In this upcoming event, we will be reaching out to the community to create a
trailer for the release of Veloren 0.8! The idea is simple, the winning video
will be used as the official trailer for the game. If recording or video editing
isn't your strong suit, don't worry! We will also be running a screenshot
competition with multiple categories alongside it. The winning trailer and
screenshots will be used to promote the game. More details on the event to come
in the following weeks, so stay tuned!

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/778718247616905246/unknown.png")
}}

# Chest of Goodies by @zesterer

I've been working on the initial implementation of `rtsim`, a server-side
component that allows tens of thousands of NPCs to be simulated simultaneously
across the world without being within the player's view distance. While the
initial implementation's use is quite simple (just a few thousand travellers
walking between sites in the world) in the long term I'm planning to use this
for economic simulation, demographic change, simulates wars, battles, migration,
and more.

I've also been doing more work on the cloud shaders. Part of that included
implementing upscaling so players with less powerful computers can run the game,
albeit at a lower internal resolution. I've also been implementing HDR
rendering. It also allows players with slightly better hardware to render the
scale at a fractional higher resolution, allowing them to get some of the
advantages SSAA with a smaller performance hit. Additionally, I've reimplemented
the Level of Detail 'fake voxel' effect in a way that much more closely fits
patterns visible on actual voxels and reduces the artifacts that previously
appeared. I've also added a secret feature for 0.8.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/779356424705671218/unknown.png")
}}

I've also been working on the game's map with @Pfau. Together, we've got it to
the state where sites are now shown on the map as icons that can be clicked
rather than the original 'brown spot on LoD'. In worldgen, I've made adjustments
to the game's tree spawning algorithm. It now uses a Whittaker map to determine
appropriate tree biome placement, something that generally results in much more
interesting spawn patterns, along with adding a new birch forest kind.

I've also removed the old Snow Pine forest kind and replaced it with fully
procedural snow. This means that trees can be partially covered with snow at the
borders of a snowy area and also that any kind of tree can have snow cover (this
is often visible on oaks and birch trees that are close to the tree line). I've
also added procedural sand dunes to deserts to improve their look and am working
on adding soil undulation in forests where tree roots would bind together soil,
causing the ground to be less smooth.

# Iced Transition by @imbris

I finally merged the first step of the iced transition. A core part of the MR is
a custom iced renderer built on top of voxygen's rendering abstraction. This
gives us flexibility by allowing us to control the details of how the UI is
rendered. It also makes it easier to implement novel custom widgets that might
need special rendering code as well as allows us to control the types used to
specify fonts and styling.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/779170236435136512/unknown.png")
}}

Furthermore, by going through voxygen's rendering abstraction, we don't have to
worry about whether the UI renderer is compatible with the rest of the rendering
stack. This allows transitions to the voxygen rendering backend (e.g. to wgpu)
without having to switch up which crates we are using for the UI. Much of the
code for the iced renderer is based on what we were using to render the conrod
UI primitives (except with iced we now get to define our own primitives).

This MR converted the main menu and the character selection screen UIs to using
iced. The HUD UI code continues to use conrod as it would be a fairly massive
undertaking to convert especially all at once. My current plan is to have an
incremental conversion of the HUD by setting up a system to route events to the
two UI systems based on which one is currently focused and/or under the mouse
with one of them being drawn on top of the other.

In the process of switching the main menu and char selection to iced some key
fixes and improvements were made:

- Passwords are no longer limited in length by the size of the input box
- Tabbing between login fields was added
- Language selection was added to the main menu

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/778658393619038248/unknown.png")
}}

This week I also merged several fixes/improvements:

- Fixed an issue where projectiles created with speeds > 80 m/s would appear to
  veer up from the aimed direction when aiming downwards. Code which limited the
  negative z velocity after applying gravity would cause the direction of the
  projectile's velocity to change. I switched this to just make gravity not be
  able to increase the negative z velocity past this limit while allowing
  existing non-gravity related velocities to remain unclamped. Eventually, we
  may add a global velocity limit which could replace this specific limit here,
  we could also look into tweaking air friction to produce a suitable terminal
  velocity (although care will need to be taken to ensure that this interacts
  nicely with other stuff like jumping physics).
- Made changing the UI scale in-game propagate properly when going back to the
  main menu.
- Fixed a panic related to a invalid aspect ratio when minimizing the window
  before the game starts up by adding the same aspect ratio validity check used
  by the Camera when changing the aspect ratio to the function which initially
  creates the Camera.
- Made voxygen save the currently selected character for each server so that the
  character will still be selected when you return to the char selection menu
  instead of having the first on no character selected. Also made voxygen
  automatically select newly created characters.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/779683050782064660/unknown-60.png",
  caption="Something special in the sky. See you next week!")
}}

Support our devs!

[Veloren Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren)

@Pfau: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/pfau)

@Songtronix: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/songtronix)

@xMAC94x: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/xmac94x)

@Acrimon: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/acrimon)
