+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 104"
description = "2 Years of Devblogs"

date = 2021-01-25
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-104"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/803763464832286780/screenshot_1611702209375.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This edition of TWiV marks two years of weekly blog posts! Although not as large
as the 100th post, this one is still special to me. I remember two years ago, I
had a semester off school and I wanted to start working on a side project. I had
found Veloren, and I found what at that point was a single prototype blog post.
I saw a lot of potential in the format and started releasing a new one each
week. Since then the project has changed drastically, and so many great new
things have come from it. I'm excited to see how it changes by next year!

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @SWilliamsGames, @Sam, @Snowram,
@lboklin, @Slipped, @xMAC94x, @Pfau, @dryadee, @James, @imbris, @pizzaluc,
@Rotsuoy, @Acrimon, @SarraKitty, @XVar, and @nheuillet!

@Pfau has a new art blog post, you can check it out
[here](https://www.patreon.com/posts/new-blog-11-and-46438286) @Scott fixed up
most of the NPC hitboxes to be more accurate to the models. @Sam worked on
various balancing things related to skill trees. He also added a new attack to
the golem and changed how dash ticked damage. Rather than ticking every
duration, it now ticks every distance traveled. @Sam also Worked on making
torvus (the bridge between the main server chat and discord) functional again.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/805223136920469504/interaction.gif")
}}

@Gemu Prepared different models for all different weapon-wielding new small
bipeds. @heyzoos fixed a server message bug where `<?>` would appear if an
entity that inflicted bleeding on a player died before the bleeding killed the
player. They also made player spell auras only affect other players in the same
group.

Rotsuoy worked on adding more life to the savanna as so it's not as naked.
@ccgauche got some help from @imbris with plugin API development by finding and
resolving a bug @ccgauche was stuck on for one week.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/449660795857403905/802761039337750528/unknown.png?width=1261&height=683")
}}

### Economics by @Christof

Besides play(test)ing the new skill system a lot during the past week, I
implemented getting neighbor sites' prices and inventories and currently code
the trade planning based on this (potentially outdated) information.

I realized that most likely a simple trade planning strategy might be sufficient
and give similar results to multi-dimensional optimization. Basically, traders
try to get the most missed wares at the cheapest place and exchange for those
wares, which are plenty here and have the highest price there.

Also, you don't need to additionally plan selling your goods to other sites,
because they will in turn send merchants to you to buy what they need. Since
travelling has a cost there is no point in shipping extra goods to sell at low
prices.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/802653005392117771/snap2021-01-23-16-36-07.png",
    caption="A push daggar by @AlbinoAxolotl")
}}

Generally, it looks like the following (potentially player visible) information
can be provided by the existing economic simulation:

- Number of town inhabitants per profession
- Local prices and stock amounts
- Traded goods between sites (type and amount) using the in-game roads
- Guarded and regularly used/visited chunks around the town
- Loaned resources to other sites
- Economic conflict lines (later also effects) between sites

{{ support() }}
