+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 179"
description = "Translations"

date = 2022-07-04
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-179"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/995091145086484490/screenshot_1657318602503.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about some work being done on the translation system. We also
have a small video of some cave spelunking!

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Isse, @Socksonme, @imbris, @DaforLynx,
@zesterer, @xMAC94x, @Sharp, @BenjamWalker, @Sam, @James, @Treeco, and
@AngelOnFira!

@YuriMome and @xMAC94x got the ultimate plan set up for our Gitlab organization,
which will give us more information about our development cycle.

{{
    video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/993033398786465883/Ostest_Hollow.mp4",
    caption="Cave spelunking by @Dumpling") }}

## Translations by @juliancoffee

I started doing translation work and started with introducing translation of
abilities (you can already see it in the ability selection menu of the diary).
Take a look at `en/hud/ability.ron` file for an example of how it is being done:

```rust
/// Localization for "global" English
(
    string_map: {
        // Debug stick
        "common.abilities.debug.possess.name": "Possessing Arrow",
        "common.abilities.debug.possess.desc": "Shoots a poisonous arrow. Lets you control your target.",
        // Sword
        "common.abilities.sword.spin.name": "Whirlwind",
        "common.abilities.sword.spin.desc": "Move forward while spinning with your sword.",
        ...
    },
)
```

Not only you can translate existing abilities, you can also translate "modded
ones" by just adding `.name` and `.desc` to ability id. And on the topic of
translation, I can also give a sneak peek of a few things.

First, we want to add translation of names for entities soon (like, you know,
rabbit or Cultist). And second, more importantly, is that we want to move from
our self-made internationalization (i18n) system to something already used in
open source world, for example .po files. I can't give any time estimate on when
they'll be ready, but if you're interested in it, please jump to our Discord to
discuss!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/998363533404274748/screenshot_1658098547268.png",
    caption="A dreary night, best to stay inside! See you next week!") }}

{{ support() }}
