+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 74"
description = "Skill system, animations"

date = 2020-06-29
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-74"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/726826859995594854/snz397v1gn751.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we get a large update from the animation team. @Gemu talks modeling,
@Snowram skeletons, and @Slipped technique. @XVar gives us a rundown on the
progress being made on the skill system. We also have another art blog by @Pfau.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @XVar, @theduke, @AngelOnFira,
@Slipped, @Patro, @Redo11, @swedneck, @samuelkieffer, @Treeco, @Nancok, @Pfau,
@zesterer, @CapsizeGlimmer, @WelshPixie, @Imbris, @Songtronix, @Shandley, and
@yusdacra!

@zesterer has been working on castles this week. A #ux working group was
created, and it is finding its footing. It will focus on improvements to how the
player interacts with the game. @WelshPixie has been working on new shoulder
armour. @XVar added chat messages when items are picked up, and the possibility
to play different sfx depending on what was picked up. There are two placeholder
sounds for swords and staves so far.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/727558508752535622/ezgif.com-video-to-gif1.gif",
  caption="New item interactions by @XVar")
}}

@xMAC94x has been continuing work on networking. He also upgraded the Rust
toolchain version as the Cargo MacOS error has been fixed. @lobster worked on
the ability to wield 2 one-handed items. More to come on this soon. @Pfau also
has a new art blog #4, which you can check out
[here](https://www.patreon.com/posts/weekly-blog-no-4-38568170). @AngelOnFira
has gotten around to lots of the translations that have been waiting to be
merged for a while.

{{
  youtube(id="JTfaHA57Nk4", caption="Playthrough by paulsoaresjr!")
}}

# Skill System Work by @XVar

This week I started work on implementing
[skills](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/merge_requests/1135), the
server-side foundation of a skill system for Veloren. Today there is only a
basic EXP/LVL system in the game - you get EXP for killing monsters, and then
you can level up. However, there isn't any concept of skills or abilities for
players yet.

A game design meeting on Discord over the weekend resulted in the decision that
adding skills to the game should be a top priority. It will allow us to start
implementing all sorts of abilities and skills to flesh out the actual gameplay
side of Veloren significantly. After this meeting, I drew up a quick concept of
how the UI for a skill group might look. This was primarily to make sure I'd
understood what the game design team actually wanted (a "skill matrix/grid" was
frequently mentioned in the meeting). This is in no way representative of how
the end result will look!

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/727561730951086140/pkymfx2.png",
  caption="Concept of the skill grid")
}}

Not all skill groups will be in a grid form, or have this kind of progression
path where you can only learn skills adjacent to already known skills, but all
skill groups will have some things in common - an EXP bar, a skill point pool,
and a list of skills that have been learnt in that group.

So distilling this down into what needs to be done for an MVP, we get this:

- Building on the existing `Stats` component that players have to include a list
  of skill groups the player knows, their current EXP and SP count in those
  groups, and a list of skills that they have learnt in that group.

- Transferring this data between the client and the server.

- Persisting the new skill groups and learnt skills to the database for each
  player.

- Adding new messages that the client can send to the server to request a skill
  unlock or a skill point refund, with associated logic for the server to accept
  or reject this request based on the current state of the player.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/722077783727145157/726827414218604644/unknown.png")
}}

While this might sound like a lot, I was actually surprised by how little work
is required to implement this on top of the existing infrastructure within
Veloren. Since it already has a robust client<>server messaging system, a
full-featured ECS synced between the client and server, etc - there's not really
much "plumbing" required to add new features. I think when a new developer to
the project like myself can say this, it's a testament to the hard work put in
by the Veloren team over the past few years.

Once this basic implementation of skill groups/points is in place, there will
still be a fair amount of work left until players actually get usable skills -
Pfau is working on the design of the in-game skill book UI. Of course, there's
actually designing/implementing the skill groups/abilities which I'm sure will
continue on for the foreseeable future as the game continues to grow :)

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/727569322427285989/unknown.png",
  caption="Skill book UI mockup")
}}

# Animation updates

## Modeling by @Gemu

Hello, my name is @Gemu. I have been remodeling a lot of the old creature models
from Veloren, so far having focused on the reptilian and several quadruped
animals. My contributions so far have been solely on the modeling side of the
reworks.

I joined Veloren a few months ago. It was then when I first started creating
voxel models and have received amazing support and feedback from the community.
I offered to rework the old dragon placeholder model, and went from there. As I
created models, the skeleton and animation progress made by @Slipped and
@Snowram truly makes the models come to life. Since I have very little
development experience myself, I’'ve mostly stuck to making the models so far,
and breaking them up in usable parts for animation. Seeing the finished models
move around has been absolutely great. Therefore I plan to learn how to help
@Slipped and @Snowram and contribute to the technical aspect as well.

So far, the reworked models of all existing reptile models and medium-sized
quadruped creatures are pretty much finished. Aside from the pre-existing
models, I have created additional creature models based on the same skeletons,
which thanks to @Slipped’ and @Snowram’s' hard work were able to appear as well.
So far I’'ve continued working on other old animal model reworks, this time
focusing on the smaller quadrupeds. Once the larger quadrupeds will be all
finished up, new models will be ready to go. I hope the players will be excited
to see all these different kinds of creatures wandering around the world as they
play.

Working on the model reworks together with the others has been very enjoyable
and a great learning experience. The future will definitely bring more of that,
and I look forward to expanding my horizon and experience towards other areas as
well.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/449660795857403905/726910091592466465/unknown.png")
}}

## Skeletons by @Snowram

Hey, I am @Snowram. I helped to implement new quadrupeds skeletons into the
game. A few weeks ago I decided to dive into Veloren animation by trying to
improve some existing skeletons and animations. It has been a pleasant
experience and the community has been very supportive. We have been working
together with @Gemu and @Slipped to bring new life to the old mobs.

While I don't have a developer background, the Veloren codebase is clear enough
for everyone to take a poke at it. I started by adding a new skeleton to improve
the look of reptile-like creatures. They previously used the "medium" quadruped
one that is shared with mammals. Reptiles have a very different gait and
morphology so a "low" quadruped skeleton was definitely needed.

I imported every new models made by @Gemu and approved by the art team. Adding
new skeleton parts is a tricky process where you have to declare all the offsets
and rotation points for each new mobs. While these offsets are mostly the same
for a given skeleton, you have to account for some specific outliers. For
example, a crocodile tail is long and segmented while a turtle is short and made
using a single bone. After that, I made several improvements to the "medium"
quadruped skeleton. I broke all their legs into 2 bones in order for them to
have feet. This change allowed for more complex animations.

Veloren can't use animations made using a dedicated software yet so all of them
are hardcoded, fortunately, it is quite easy to animate voxel models using some
basic math. Some time ago @Imbris added a way to hotload animations and it made
the whole process more seamless than ever. I made some basic animations and
@Slipped did his magic to make them awesome.

In conclusion, I very much enjoyed working as a team with everyone involved.
This has been a great learning experience and the fact that each person has
brought their own skillset into the collective effort is motivating. You always
want to give the best to make the whole picture as great.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/727648581267488828/ezgif.com-video-to-gif4.gif")
}}

## Technique by @Slipped

Hey, @Slipped here! Been a while since I've written anything up so this seemed
like a good spot to jump back into the blog. My main branch for the last month
or so has been the quadruped rework with @Gemu and @Snowram. It’s been great to
work with a team for a change as usually my work has been pretty isolated, and
we certainly needed one here as the change has been massive.

As @Snowram described, the main goal is to separate the low, reptile-like
quadrupeds from the taller wolf-like quadrupeds. At the same time we'’re
reimporting all of @Gemu’'s reworks (every mob has been rebuilt from the ground
up), as well as building in a much deeper animation setup for the mobs. This
includes the breaking of the leg into leg/foot for `quadruped_medium` as
@Snowram mentioned, and also a general internal rewrite of the skeleton to
adjust every bone to be a child or grandchild of a single parent bone (an
important concept that I mostly neglected until recently).

The branch also has the addition of some new techniques that I’'ve learned from
the humanoid skeleton in the last few months. These include adding orientation
tilt so that the body rotates smoothly on turns, and also using a ground-based
foot movement model instead of using pendulum rotation as we see in main. We’'re
also differentiating strides for the first time. Animals have been moving around
at varying speeds in-game but their animation has not reflected that. Now in the
branch, we differentiate a trot and gallop for varying mob speeds, with
different movement frequencies and intensities of motion to highlight the
changed gait. One last piece we’ve got in now is a basic set of attack
animations for the quadrupeds. They’re in a pretty plain state currently, it
makes the combat feel a good bit more engaging when you see that feedback from
the monster you'’re fighting.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/727647689378103457/ezgif.com-video-to-gif2.gif",
  caption="New wolf animation. See you next week!")
}}

Support our devs!

[Veloren Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren)

@Pfau: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/pfau)

@Songtronix: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/songtronix)

@YuriMomo: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/YuriMomo)

@xMAC94x: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/xmac94x)

@Acrimon: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/acrimon)
