+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 149"
description = "Holiday event"

date = 2021-12-06
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-149"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/917959426063859712/screenshot_1638928774230.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about the plans for the upcoming Christmas holiday week.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @tygyh, @Sam, @zesterer, and
@imbris!

This week has been slower for developers as we approach the Christmas season.
However, we have something special planned for that this year!

Be sure to check out last week's devblog recap by @Dalyc if you missed it!

{{
    youtube(id="7sw-VZTEAx4")
}}

## Christmas week by @AngelOnFira

From the 20th to the 30th of December, we are going to be running our first
holiday event! Not only that, but on the 25th, on Christmas Day, we'll be
hosting a Christmas party for anyone who wants to join!

We've been working on a system to add a feature flag that we can toggle when the
event starts, and this will allow us to completely change out how parts of
worldgen and assets are loaded. We have some pretty exciting stuff planned!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/917123679035486269/917899494081822741/screenshot_1638914683061.png")
}}

The main features we're going for are all about winter. We've got way more snow,
decorations on trees, and even ice on lakes! Lots of Christmas elves (developers
and artists) are working hard on this right now to get more assets and themed
features into the game. Here are some other ideas that have been thrown around:

- Blue cheese
- Guards with Christmas colored lanterns
- Snowmen that spawn
- Snowshoes to help players move better in the snow
- Sleighs and reindeer

Note; these ideas aren't final, and we don't know if we can get all of them in
before the holiday week starts. If you've wanted to contribute something small,
maybe now is the time! We've created a branch and dev channel for the work on
this event. Message me on Discord if you want to be added to that.

Also! This holiday event is the first one we have planned, but we want to work
on adding more holidays from more cultures! If you have something you celebrate,
reach out so we can figure out how we can make it happen!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/917123679035486269/917898692290314250/screenshot_1638914492370.png",
    caption="Out on a cold winters night. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
