+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 77"
description = "Particles, multithread computing"

date = 2020-07-20
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-77"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/735447097364578395/agnpLcH.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we hear about @lobster's progress on particles. @AngelOnFira
discusses multithreading gamedev.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @AngelOnFira, @Sharp, @Pfau, @imbris,
@Menko1437, @zesterer, @Slipped, @Sam, @xMAC94x, @T-Dark0, @yusdacra,
@Songtronix, @lausec, and @PatatasDelPapa!

@Songtronix has been doing lots of work on Airshipper. He also ran the first UX
working group meeting! @YuriMomo has been doing lots of UX work. @Felixader has
been working on the city, town, and village descriptions for the brushwood
elves. @imbris merged the winit upgrade, which consisted of a monumental amount
of work.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/735487717235753020/fishing.gif",
    caption="Beginning of the fishing animation by @Snowram")
}}

@XVar is working on an RFC proposal with @Sharp to improve how persistence
works. Primarily the goal is to figure out how to deserialize items from
inventories and loadouts. @lausec improved some German translations and fixed a
bug where you could mount pets from very far away. They're also working on
allowing admins to join a server even if they aren't on the whitelist. @Gemu
modeled around 50 new axes and hammers to go with more diverse weapon drops.

## Particle Improvements by @lobster

@lobster is still working on improving particles. Recently, they scrapped the
particle emitter component, because particles are a visual representation of the
already existing game state. It's better to use the existing game state than to
create an unnecessary duplicate state. It would have eventually lead to state
desynchronisation bugs, as well as a waste of memory.

@lobster also scrapped the configurable particle idea, because of performance
concerns with uploading data to the GPU. Instead, we upload the bare minimum for
the particle instance to function, in addition to some particles having
different context dependencies. There isn't a nice way to have a generic config
that will allow for use of those dependencies in any meaningful way. Instead, we
can write shaders, which are hot-loadable and more flexible because they allow
for data values like a config to be able to also have expressions, statements,
and use the context dependencies that are passed in etc. Basically, it's the
same as animation code, except instead of bones, there are vertices, instances,
and fragments. glsl instead of Rust.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/733630340089905162/screenshot_1594981422323.png")
}}

## CPU Workloads by @AngelOnFira

> Earlier this week I saw [a
> post](https://www.reddit.com/r/opensource/comments/hs99i0/distribute_cpu_workloads_to_multiple_cores_in/)
> on /r/opensource asking if a piece of software could distribute single core
> games over multiple core. I wrote this long-winded reply.

I think this is actually quite a good question. The short answer is no, a piece
of software is bound to how it handles computation. For a longer answer, I
should mention that although I've been exposed to some of these topics, I
haven't implemented them myself, and so I'm open to corrections or further
details. My experience comes from an open source game I'm contributing to,
Veloren. The programming language we use, Rust, allows us to make quite good use
of multiple CPU cores to their full capabilities.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/735494052644126760/speed.gif")
}}

First, it's important to know why it's difficult for code to work on different
cores, or threads, or more fundamentally, processes. The key factor this comes
down to is the idea of "thread safety". At the ground level, many larger program
architectures break down to how the variables manipulated in them. If I have a
variable, and I allow multiple pieces of running code to access it, then I'm
very likely to make mistakes with how this variable is used. There are a few
questions to be asked about this:

- If a thread deleted this variable, do other threads know that it was deleted?
- Did a thread read the variable before another thread updated it? If so, was
  that the right order that I wanted?
- What if one thread overwrites an update that another thread just made to it?

These questions are not easy to answer without guarantees, like the ones that
Rust provides:

- If multiple threads try to have "ownership" of a variable at the same time,
  the program won't compile.
- Once the "owner" of a variable goes out of scope, that variable is also
  deleted. No one else except the owner would expect it to be still there.

Further, there are some other ways that Rust helps you:

- Variables are immutable by default. This means that if you don't explicitly
  allow a variable to be changed, you can be sure that it won't change under
  your nose, and that you can rely on it being the same.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/735494340163665930/screenshot_1594986609043.png")
}}

When a game is only using 1 thread, it doesn't have to worry about any of this.
Will anyone change this variable before I use it next? No, because only I can
change it. What if the variable is deleted? Well, that's my fault and no one
else's.

_This next section is purely speculation on my part, I don't have any industry
experience._

Next, why don't AAA games make use of these extra cores? A primary reason is
that the engines these games uses are often very large and have many moving
parts that prevent them from changing their core architecture. It would require
a fundamental overhaul to introduce functionality that would allow it to
distribute the workload to multiple threads. Further, lots of research into
distributed and parallel computing was still going on while these engines were
being created.

On top of this, AAA games are quite used to working within hardware constraints.
This is because when you are leading a game's development, you need to
explicitly tell each team how much compute or graphics processing time they are
allowed to use each frame. For AAA games on consoles, this is even more clear.
Each PS4 has the exact same CPU and GPU, so you can be sure that if you run the
game at the required 30 fps, anyone else will be able to as well. Back when
these engines were being created for PC games, many computers only had one core,
one thread. If you're suddenly telling these teams that they have double the
compute power across two threads, or maybe 4 times on a different CPU, it
wouldn't really change the engine that has to cooperate with consoles.

Finally, many games are not actually CPU bound. It is often the graphics card
that is the limiting factor. Some tasks are best suited for each type of
processing. For example, rendering lighting at each pixel is great for a GPU
that has thousands of "dumb" cores. AI pathfinding that requires a lot of
"smarter" compute is best on CPU. This doesn't hold true for all games, but it's
much easier to improve algorithm runtime for CPU tasks than it is for GPU, which
intrinsically has to do work on 1920\*1080 = 2073600 pixels each frame.

Anyways, I hope that most of this is correct and helpful. I'll send it to my
team as well and add any edits if there is anything that is very out of place.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/735491595859787816/screenshot_1595091768804.png",
    caption="Many mountains to explore. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
