+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 139"
description = "Bugs, economic system"

date = 2021-09-27
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-139"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/893855127797125120/screenshot_1633181355018.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about improvements being made to the hitbox system. There are
also fixes for how your cursor works in-game, and some changes to the health
system.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @juliancoffee, @Sam, @xMAC94x, @j4n3z,
@imbris, @XVar, @Seth, @Bafon, @Capucho, @heydabop, @zesterer, @ubruntu, and
@Slipped!

@Saluki did a little bit of refactoring on some asset names so references should
be a bit more logical.

## Bug searching by @Yuri and @zesterer

Yuri has been working on searching for bugs. Here is a description of one bug,
written by @zesterer:

One of the mindflayers (let's call him Dave) reduced the maximum health of
another (let's call her Susan). When Susan's AI code ran, she checked her health
proportion to decide what strategy to use next. But the problem is that when the
maximum health of an entity gets changed, it doesn't change the current health.

So you had a situation where Susan's current health > her maximum health. If you
calculate health as a proportion of the maximum, in that case, you end up with a
number > 1. So the only thing that needs to happen is that her maximum health
gets updated by Dave, and then on the next (or even the same) tick Susan runs
her AI code. And Susan was using this >1 proportion as a probability, which is
not valid (you can't have a probability > 1, or more than certain).

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/888866981766381639/screenshot_1631992793141.png",
    size=80)
}}

## New economic system by @Christof

I have a working prototype of the new economic system in my side branch. This
system is much more complex (e.g. compare the image below to older tech trees in
[devblog 114](https://veloren.net/devblog-114/)), has reusable tools, building
ground limiting city population, and works even in remote biomes. It prefers
different house styles (tent, hut, wood, and stone house) and food types in
different biomes.

The next steps are: better balance between tiers (e.g. different gem/ore types)
and making the economic situation more player visible in cities (clothing,
housing, activities).

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/892529116790816799/economy.png")
}}

{{ support() }}
