+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 169"
description = "Arthropods, storage"

date = 2022-04-25
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-169"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/964850225535655996/screenshot_1650108494806.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about some balances to arthropods. We also hear a bit about
bank storage.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @Anton, @Christof, @Sam, and
@UncomfySilence!

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/968242028007800913/unknown.png",
    caption="The map for the future 0.13 release party") }}

@ubruntu has been working on bank storage, which is a separate inventory that
players will be able to access in towns to store excess items. Credit goes to
@Toaster for the sprite model.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/968263877269803078/screenshot_1650920663491.png")
}}

## Arthropods and the Harvester @UncomfySilence

I've made a small balance tweaks branch which touches upon a couple of things
that weren't quite right nor was I happy with.

As part of this, I've finally rebalanced arthropods, so the long pain in finally
over. It took considerably longer than expected due to multiple things so I'm
incredibly sorry for the wait. I also ended up changing the stats for most hats
so that they're better befitting of their rank alongside more specialized stats,
so I'd suggest checking them out and comparing!

I've also adjusted the stats of the Harvester so that it has roughly the same
difficulty as a T4 boss. To hinder even more feature creep I am planning on
making another MR which will give the Harvester a new set of skills to make sure
that it's as threatening as possible.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/966217137666531378/unknown.png",
    caption="Dinner time! See you next week!) }}

{{ support() }}
