+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 92"
description = "First Contribution"

date = 2020-11-02
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-92"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/771848689752866826/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we hear from @ubruntu about being a first-time contributor. We also
have a community spotlight with @Kalculate.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Pfau, @Fausk, @Sam, @ubruntu, @imbris,
@Bbenton91, @zesterer, @YuriMomo, @Tadabito, @Adam, and @BottledByte!

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/771851916950634496/unknown.png")
}}

Veloren was just accepted to [speak at
MiniDebConf](https://mdco2.mini.debconf.org/talks/8-community-game-development-in-rust-a-biopsy/)
in late November! This week, @ubruntu implemented applying buffs on projectiles.
Now bow attacks cause the bleed debuff just like melee weapons. @zesterer made
some subtle improvements to clouds. @Fausk rewrote some item descriptions. @Sam
worked on some backend combat improvements.

@Slipped worked with @Snowram to continue the long-overdue process of purging a
huge chunk of the animation codebase. @TBG has been working on some small issues
with the help of @Sam. @Snowram added the ability for consumables to cause buffs
and effects.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/772872657078845498/unknown.png",
  caption="The diff for the animation codebase")
}}

@XVar is starting some early work on inventory upgrades. This will ditch the
"bag space as a stat" concept and instead base it on equippable loadout items
providing slots. A backpack could give you a large number of inventory slots,
while a toolbelt would give a small number. But when you drop or store the bag,
all the things that were in its slots would stay inside it.

# First Time Contributing by @ubruntu

Hello! My name is Bryant, and my nickname in Discord is @ubruntu. A few days ago
I made my first code contribution to Veloren, which added the bleed debuff to
bow attacks. I’m not going to pretend I jumped in the code by myself and opened
a merge request in a day. The hardest part was getting started.

Three months ago I joined the Discord channel after reading about the project on
Reddit. At first, I wasn’t thinking about contributing at all. I just wanted to
experience the game, and follow in Discord about what it will become. It’s
almost embarrassing, but my character on the official server is level 96. Like,
why am I enjoying a pre-alpha game so much?

So one day @Sam, the combat team lead, mentioned in #general how it would be an
easy task to improve bows by adding a bleed debuff to their attacks, and he
listed a couple of files where the change to add a bleed debuff would be. He
offered to help anyone that wanted to take on the work so I said I was
interested in trying it out. It took me a few tries to get my coding set up
right for the project. There were some steps to setting up my IDE and Gitlab
fork but in hindsight, that stuff wasn’t too difficult.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/771822130807177256/unknown.png")
}}

I can’t say enough how helpful @Sam was. I sent him an empty code block from a
match expression and said I had no idea what to do. He told me what was needed
and how to do it, and for the rest of the night he was immediately responsive
when I had questions. By noon the next day the code was reviewed, merged, and
deployed on the official server.

Now is a great time to contribute to the project. There are plenty of
opportunities for addressing issues, moving the game forward on the roadmap, and
rethinking how we do what’s already there. I think everything I’ve coded so far
requires only the first 8 chapters of the Rust book, so anyone looking to
contribute code shouldn’t feel like they have to become code masters first.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/771813151058034688/screenshot_1604082738945.png")
}}

# Community Spotlight: @Kalculate

Hi, @Kalculate here! I'm a Software Engineer by trade, a league axe thrower, and
I've always wanted to build games. I honestly spend more time thinking about the
design and systems inside of games than I actually spend playing them. To me,
games have an incredible capacity to inspire and propel people to follow their
own progression in life and being a part of something like that is a deep
personal dream. I originally found out about Veloren on Reddit. So far, I've
worked on NPCs and combat implementations.

I bought Cube World when it became available years ago and saw so much potential
in it. I thought it was insane that 2 people were working on it and one guy
built the absolutely gorgeous map that generates in a way that had me
enraptured. Veloren is the promise of a new, endless adventure where we could
see engaging gameplay on top of the deceptively simple (and charming) voxel
graphics.

I want to be able to help the core maintainers build out the design of the game
by being a part of the design team. I'm also very excited to be working in Rust
and building a game with other passionate people, so I intend on contributing
code as often as I can, on top of answering questions and being active in the
Discord channel. On top of that, I also think I could help by documenting design
changes along to way to keep a good image of what kind of game Veloren could be
at the end of the tunnel.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/772098378590715954/screenshot_1604152306090_merged_with_1604152317131.png",
  caption="Resting at night. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
