+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 78"
description = "Refactoring world dimensions"

date = 2020-07-27
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-78"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/735214211759865856/screenshot_1595359066529.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week has seen lots of progress from lots of developers. @Sharp gives us
some perspective into refactoring the world dimension constant.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @imbris, @yusdacra, @Sam,
@Snowram, @lausek, @Pfau, @Slipped, and @T-Dark!

@Ellinia has been working on some SFX with help from @Eden. @lausek worked on
German translations and refactoring auth. @lobster has been cleaning up the
number of draw calls for particles and added an option to disable them
completely. @Pfau was working on adding a UI for the group system implemented by
@imbris. He was also working on a social window overhaul. @zesterer has been
working on caves.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/738488317158359165/secondar-attack.gif",
  caption="Secondary bow attack by @Sam")
}}

@Sam added a new secondary attack to the bow. They are also completing work on
diverse weapon stats. @Capucho threw together [a small
site](https://veloren-status.herokuapp.com/server/server.veloren.net) to display
info about the official Veloren server. @Felixader finished a format spec draft
to follow when writing quests. @XVar integrated imgui-rs into Veloren as a test
for flexible debug UIs. It's still in the air if it will be fully integrated.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/737654838137061476/screenshot_1595809943919.png",
  caption="Quadruped rework by @Gemu")
}}

@T-Dark worked on the character alias substring filter. This will help server
owners ban certain works from character names. @Sharp did a lot of work to
support arbitrarily sized maps. @Snowram helped with the latest animation
rework. @Gemu reworked all of the small quadruped animal models. @Songtronix
figured out where the auth 500 error came from. @Capucho has been revamping the
server cli.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/737821309068640296/imgui.gif",
  caption="Debug UI test by @XVar")
}}

# Refactoring WORLD_SIZE by @Sharp

For at least as long as I've been part of Veloren, we've had a global variable
called `WORLD_SIZE` that determined the size of the map at compile time.
Initially, it was only used in a handful of places localized to WorldSim,
however, mostly due to me, we ended up using it all over the place. In my
branch, it was even starting to creep into the client. This was due to
generating the map directly on the client, rather than just using an image (for
complicated reasons I don't want to go into).

Obviously, that was not good, since a client couldn't even host a map of a
different size from the server. And it also meant that hosting maps of different
sizes from the default required code changes and recompiles. No test server
could keep a different-from-default-size map, which a lot of people wanted. It
wasn't just laziness that was stopping me from doing this refactor, though. We
also have several invariants on the world map size. For example, each chunk
dimension has to be a power of 2, the product of the chunk dimensions must fit
in a usize, each block dimension must fit in an i32, each chunk dimension must
fit in a u16, no chunk dimension can exceed 2^14, and so on.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/737699903106580500/unknown.png",
  caption="Catoblepas model by @Gemu")
}}

And, since doing arithmetic around WORLD_SIZE is on the critical path for a lot
of performance-sensitive stuff, I wanted to make sure that if we switched to
using dynamic values, we did it in a way that we could (in theory) recover the
performance we lost due to missed compiler optimizations.

So, my solution was to create a new type, `MapSizeLg`, storing the number of
bits for each dimension. The type verifies at construction time that all
invariants are satisfied, so for any instance of that type we can freely assume
all of those invariants. We can also encode those as optimized methods and
functions that operate only on values of that type, enforcing that code
practices good hygiene and doesn't accidentally mix non-world-map-size values
in.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/737664474449838120/screenshot_1595943286553.png",
  caption="A rectangular map in the new format")
}}

Not only that, since we verify the invariants on construction, in the future if
we need to we can use unsafe LLVM assertions or integer arithmetic in order to
let the compiler perform the same optimizations it would have in the constant
case (outside of stuff like constant folding of course). So this design both
simplifies a lot of existing code (making it much more robust to issues like
overflows, since we have consistent methods we call for given operations), and
ensures that we can claw back any performance we lose.

Ultimately it was a lot of work--the diff was about 2.5k lines--but it made the
next step easy: updating our map format. This is actually the first time we've
updated the format since its inception, but it was built from the getgo to
support forward migrations, so the process was pretty straightforward. For maps
without dimension information, we make an educated guess at the actual
dimensions. We do this by insisting that the map dimensions be the square of a
power of 2 in order to perform the migration, and if they are we assume the map
is actually square with that dimension.

For new maps, we directly save the real dimension information. We also include a
"continent scaling hack" that's used as a factor to our world generation and is
usually based on world size, to help keep outputs consistent with the initial
map that was generated without sacrificing flexibility. Because the migrations
occur automatically and in memory, no changes to any existing files are
required. Just like before, you can set a map in your `server_settings.ron`, but
unlike before this will work for maps of arbitrary size with no code changes.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/736942479785328704/screenshot_1595771110863.png")
}}

In the end, we have zero remaining instances of WORLD_SIZE, and only one use of
its replacement. The replacement is a default map size for use in the initial
generation, which can be updated to produce maps of different size. In the
future, when generation is more stable, we will provide hooks so that modifying
code to set this value, along with other generation parameters, is not needed to
produce a new map.

Finally, since I thought it was cool: we exploit Rust's new ability to panic in
constants to make sure that the default map size respects the invariants we
mentioned, at compile time. If our validation function fails when initializing
the constant, we will panic! This is the kind of extra assurance that makes me
love Rust 🙂

In fact, the refactor itself did not (appear to) introduce any new bugs at
runtime! Only two runtime issues surfaced, and both of them were due to writing
the migration too hastily. For me, this really illustrates why Rust is such a
powerful tool for collaborative development.

First, Rust's design makes abusing global variables difficult, pushing coders
towards a much cleaner design. In a language with a pervasive global mutable
state, I might have been tempted to try to just make the world size updatable
somehow, but that would've been a big mistake.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/738166605368000543/screenshot_1596063020527.png")
}}

Secondly, being able to perform large-scale refactors on a widely shared
codebase without introducing significant bugs is really important for avoiding
tech debt, especially on a fast-moving project like Veloren. I've used a lot of
languages in my career, and Rust is the only one where I can routinely perform a
large refactor without breaking tons of existing code. While some have IDEs that
make refactoring faster than it is in Rust (for now, anyway), in none of them
has refactoring been as "safe" as it is in Rust.

This is not an accident. From day one, Rust's mission has been to provide strong
mechanisms for enforcing strict isolation boundaries; mechanisms powerful enough
to actually enforce the invariants that occur in large, real-world programming
projects. Ownership, eschewing exceptions and global state, explicit type
annotations at function boundaries, mutex poisoning, explicit casts, floats
lacking Ord, and so on are all aimed squarely at this target. It's not just
about type safety, it's about working as hard as humanly possible to avoid
footguns. And it only works because the whole community buys into it.

So, while refactoring may not be the most "sexy" kind of programming out there,
for me it's where Rust really shines through 🙂

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/738163980257853540/screenshot_1596062354346.png",
  caption="Sun setting on the mountains. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
