+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 71"
description = "GamingOnLinux Interview"

date = 2020-06-08
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-71"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307708146581519/720087973806211102/7foh1qpbde351.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, there is a lot of external work to check out. This includes the Rust
Gamedev monthly newsletter, an interview with GamingOnLinux, and @Pfau's art
blog. We also have new contributors to our Open Collective!

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @yusdacra, @xMAC94x, @xvar,
@Shandley, @Songtronix, @Imbris, @Pfau, @JoeyMaher, @Slipped, and @scottc!

Lots of external updates this week! We did an [interview with
GamingOnLinux](https://www.gamingonlinux.com/2020/06/interviewed-veloren-an-upcoming-foss-multiplayer-voxel-rpg).
It covered many questions about Veloren's development with open source
management and Rust. The [Rust Gamedev May
newsletter](https://rust-gamedev.github.io/posts/newsletter-010/) has come out.
@Pfau has written [his second
blog](https://www.patreon.com/posts/weekly-blog-no-2-38026771) about artwork in
Veloren.

Our [Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren) has some new
contributors! With the initial donations, we're going to start looking at how
we're handling infrastructure. This will include reimbursing those who are
voluntarily running our servers. It will definitely let our release parties run
on the best hardware money can rent!

Airshipper now supports Mac thanks to @Songtronix's hard work! @CapsizeGlimmer
has added group chat and regional chat functionality. @AVeryLostNomad worked on
some minor features and bug fixes. These include an auto walk key, and lanterns
no longer staying on when dropped. @xvar is working on improving how we use
clippy, allowing us to catch a lot more potential errors in the future.
@Shandley has been continuing work on SFX.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/719207595725946910/unknown.png",
  caption="120 bookcases by @SausageRolls")
}}

## GamingOnLinux Interview

> If you haven't checked it out already, here is a snippet [from the
> interview](https://www.gamingonlinux.com/2020/06/interviewed-veloren-an-upcoming-foss-multiplayer-voxel-rpg)!

#### GOL: Why not go with an off-the-shelf game engine?

**F:** "The big game engines like Unity or Unreal are great for general-purpose
games. They’ve been heavily optimized for genres like first-person shooters, or
games with meshes that you just import from your modeling software. However,
once you want to dictate the rules on how the complex fundamentals of your world
are created, you can run into some issues.

Engines have a lot of overhead and provide you with high-level abstractions.
It’s as if you’re given Steve from Minecraft to control, but you really want to
be controlling Qwop from QWOP. It’s a lot more work, but you have more precision
in moving the way you want. Among other things, these engines would have a
representation of what an “object” is. In Veloren, we would need each voxel in
the world to be represented by this “object”. Internally, we represent voxels
with as little data as we can, of which is very specific to our needs since we
have that level of control. On the other hand, engines would store a lot more
metadata about it, since engines need to work more generally for any type of
game. It might include unneeded physics abilities, or the functionality related
to meshes other than cubes.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/449903525653250079/718906987496079360/image.png",
  caption="Veloren group and regional chat")
}}

On the other hand, there are other game engines that are more specific, such as
the Amethyst engine, which is also written in Rust. It offers lots of modular
functionality, where we could pick and choose systems that we like, or use the
engine as a whole. However, Amethyst is still being developed, and wasn’t far
enough along when Veloren was started.

Our approach to custom engine development has resulted in some unique systems.
The land formation is sculpted by an erosion system that simulates over millions
of years, and creates realistic features such as downhill rivers. Our
procedurally-generated villages already have some simple economic simulation.
This comes from attracting developers that are interested in experimenting with
ideas that are niche and novel, and have an incredibly flexible engine to work
with."

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/719253943095394334/Dragon.png",
  caption="By @Zukel")
}}

#### GOL: Your ultimate goal for Veloren?

**F:** "For each of us, it’s different. The project was originally started by people
who wanted to make an experience that would fill the void created by Cube World.
However, since then, many people have joined who had never played Cube World
before. The project founder, @zesterer, wants to create a dynamic world where
settlements and cities interact economically and politically. @Songtronix’s goal
is to improve the user's experience with Veloren, primarily by working on our
launcher, Airshipper. @Pfau, wants to create a vivid world from the art of our
many artists. @Slipped wants to create a captivating animation system. @Timo
wants to create a dynamic experience that friends can have. @Sharp is using
real-world natural processes to simulate our world generation system. With
everything that inspires each one of us, I think we can create the game we are
hoping for."

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/719280868060954734/snap2020-06-07-16-03-14.png",
  caption="A visored sallet by @AlbinoAxolotl. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
