+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 141"
description = "Crafting and salvage"

date = 2021-10-11
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-141"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/896445795837050961/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about a crafting overhaul and the new salvage functionality
that will come with it.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @imbris, @juliancoffee, @Sam,
@xMAC94x, @IsseW, @JTriantafylos, @Pfau, @antoniomuso, @ubruntu, @devrique,
@GLawrence29, @Treeco, and @CapsizeGlimmer!

This week, Veloren hit 10,000 commits! You can read this week's meeting notes
[here](https://hackmd.io/eGxCtRT8SliQ_4k75o2ZQA). Several developers are
participating in Hacktoberfest contributions to Veloren; make sure to read [our
blog post about it](https://veloren.net/hacktoberfest-2021) if you want to also
participate!

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/898916821665738762/unknown.png",
    caption="Number of lines of code at this point")
}}

@ubruntu added loot notifications for groups. When people are in a group, they
receive notifications of what other members of the group pick up. People no
longer have to ask "What did the boss drop?" or "What was in that chest?".
@juliancoffee Fixed strange names for travelers, no more Orcs named Danari.

## Crafting updates by @Sam

I've begun (and almost finished) making some tweaks to how crafting works in the
backend. Crafting now works through an enum. For now, there will be two kinds of
crafting: `SimpleRecipe` (which works much the same as current crafting), and
`Salvage` (which is the dismantle recipe, but better).

For `SimpleRecipe`, rather than only sending over the recipe that the client is
trying to craft, it now also sends over a vector of slots that the client wants
to use to craft the recipe. In the future, this will aid in allowing a player to
specify which item they want to use in a recipe where there are multiple valid
inputs. This will be the case for modular weapons, which is one of the main
motivations for me to do all this work.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/898557257929850890/screenshot_1634275493612.png",
    caption="A potion is being brewed!")
}}

Also, all dismantling recipes have been removed. Instead, they now go through
the aforementioned `Salvage`. This works by specifying a slot that the client
wishes to salvage, and the server then checks if the item can be salvaged,
returning the salvaged items if it could be.

Salvaging will now also be done using a new crafting station, the Salvaging
Station. @Pfau has made a model for this. @Snowram has also been working on
getting the salvage output to be displayed in the tooltip of an item when you
are at the salvaging station.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/898627919222546472/screenshot_1634319966789.png",
    caption="Flight coming in at night. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
