+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 121"
description = "Meat, design overhauls"

date = 2021-05-24
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-121"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/845786016232636446/Bildschirmfoto_von_2021-05-21_13-11-38.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see lots of design changes to many systems. We hear about how this
what is going on with the crafting and loot systems, as well as planned
improvements in the combat fields.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Slipped, @juliancoffee, @xMAC94x, @Sam,
@James, @sudoreboot, @aweinstock, @Pfau, @XVar, @hqurve, @imbris, and @Sharp!

You can take a look at this week's meeting notes
[here](https://hackmd.io/bZAin6tFQnm2HfQjiISvDg).

@Sam removed the 2 old weapon loadout slots and added 4 new ones in their place.
With the new weapon slots, you can have up to 4 hands worth of weapons, so you
can run either 2 2h weapons, 1 2h and 2 1h weapons, or 4 1h weapons.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/845783098683031563/unknown.png",
  caption="UI work by @Pfau and @R.A.B")
}}

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/845783620722360330/unknown.png",
  caption="A loot log")
}}

The loot log removes the loot messages from the chat and puts them above it.
It's scrollable and will only show recently looted items when not being
interacted with (with the older ones fading out). @aweinstock has been working
on addressing reviews on the farming and voxel minimap MRs. He's also made a
camera zoom effect for ChargedRanged:

{{
  video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/767442908767977473/845746253145047060/veloren_sniperbow_20210522.mp4")
}}

@Snowram has been learning the basics of the new site procgen by trying to make
a cemetery. The tombstone models are by @sStellar, and there is still work to go
before the final version.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/845785269919547422/unknown-17.png")
}}

{{
  video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/846423012160307230/Mindflayer_fight_WIP.mp4",
  caption="A full fight against the Mindflayer by @WECW-KKY on a custom modded
  server.")
}}

### Bow changes by @Sam

This week, I started on a bow rework, with all abilities have being replaced.
The new M1 is very similar to the old M2, in that you charge it for greater
effect, and it fires when you release. The main changes here in functionality
are that it no longer drains energy, and it now will reward energy on shots that
hit. The new M2 is called repeater like the old S1, however, it now has new
functionality. Instead of the leap and the simultaneous fire of a few arrows, it
instead will continually fire arrows with an increasing rate of fire over time
(each arrow costs energy to fire). The new S1 is a shotgun-like ability, which
fires multiple arrows with some degree of spread. With this rework come very
slightly different skills, and a reset to the bow skill tree.

### Improvements by @James

For the past few days I've been working on moving all body attributes to RON
files. These are body and species-specific stats like mass, height, base health,
etc. I have each attribute loading from a RON file into one compound asset (eg.
the mass.ron and base_health.ron get loaded together as one BodyAttributes
asset). The server loads the RON files and sends the body data to the client on
initial sync. This means that server owners could adjust values and not require
a modified client. To help with debugging and development, I'm planning to add
an admin command to resync body data (since the assets already hot-reload) after
the initial sync.

I also fixed a bug where NPCs would ignore you if you hit them with a projectile
from too far away. While I initially thought this was simply because they were
being attacked from outside of a set range, I discovered I had accidentally
reduced the response time for NPCs for damage from 3.1 seconds to 0.1 seconds
about a month ago. This meant that when an NPC received damage, it had 0.1
seconds to respond. If it didn't see the target in those 0.1 seconds it would
return to idling. I returned the damage memory duration to 3.1 seconds as well
as provided a way for NPCs to path toward positions outside of the maximum
allowed pathing radius by choosing an intermediate point a set distance away. A\*
pathfinding gets more and more expensive the longer your path is so hopefully we
will see some performance improvement in the agent system.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/846589880570085386/zepp.PNG")
}}

### Dungeon balancing by @juliancoffee

I've been working on a lite dungeon rebalance by updating minibosses at lower
tiers and adjusting loot tables at higher tiers. Now there is Deadwood in T0
dungeons instead of Bonerattler, and Rats in T1 dungeons instead of Bonerattler
pack. For making dungeon looting a bit more enjoyable I removed low tier gear
from cultist loot table and added average enemy loot to Beastmasters so they
don't drop cultist gear only to have small wow effect when they do. Also each
dungeon now has unique loot from chests. Also for purpose of modification and
future reworks I added placeholder armor and loot table for each boss. For
dungeon enemies and village inhabitants I've added .ron files to specify their
loadout.

### Glider and physics changes @sudoreboot

I implemented auto-glide by making auto-walk work properly while gliding. While
enabled, it will assume pitch control to take you as far as possible in the
direction you're looking. With free-look enabled you can now spend your time
looking around at the scenery while gliding. This is a step in the direction of
making the glider more accessible to use. There will likely be a setting added
in the future to automatically toggle it while gliding.

This feature is not meant to make manual piloting obsolete, so if you find
yourself using the functionality even when you would have preferred not to,
please provide feedback to help us make it more balanced.

I've specified some more appropriate masses for some species and increased the
(logical, not visual) size of some objects (which makes them a little less...
aerodynamic).

I also scaled down the resulting knockback on entities of a mass under 40 kg,
which hopefully removes the involuntary bird-golf minigame from hammer combat.
It, together with increasing the max possible drag applied to an entity per tick
(which is a necessary safeguard against very bad bugs), should prevent loot
drops from sometimes flying off into the distance when a mob dies immediately
from an attack with knockback.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/846747812410556476/1dcqi1etb6071.png")
}}

### Meat and crafting by @Slipped

I'm finishing up a rather big MR that adds a lot of the core of Veloren's armor
progression system. It's sort of grown into a bit of a behemoth but I'm ok with
it in this case because I think doing this all at once is very helpful towards
building a single, cohesive system.

The goal of the MR is to get three things to work synchronously: loot, crafting,
and gear. The MR started with loot, as a simple meat MR designed to give
different animals different meat drops that you can cook in towns to help with
combat. This gave a cheaper, non-potion option to healing, and made sure there's
always something to be gained from simple combat in the wild.

Once animals dropped appropriate meats we wanted to flesh out their loot tables
to a more finalized state, and we knew we wanted them to drop hides. So animals
now drop specific hides (animal hide/tough
hide/scale/carapace/plate/dragonscale) depending on their type and overall
difficulty.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/846502970229129227/Wuffi.png")
}}

From here we get into crafting, since we obviously needed something to do with
these materials. So we started re-imagining the crafting system. From the hides
you can now craft leathers, and use them in different recipes, so the system
goes much deeper than simple leather scraps like before.

Making hides into leather doesn't get you much without a final, usable product
though, so after that we started bringing in Gemu's armor sets to finalize
progression of the 'hide' armor track.

Next, covering only hide seemed a little lame so we expanded to the mail and
cloth armor tracks. These armors are craftable mainly from ingots (which can be
smelted in the new forges) and cloths (which can be spun in the new spinning
wheel, and crafted into armor in new loom stations). Next, these ores weren't
actually accessible yet so we've started on a minor cave overhaul to add
distinct difficulty levels to caves, so you can fight your way through tougher
enemies to reach deeper levels with better ores for the best armor.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/846167706666926090/unknown.png")
}}

Adding new plants for cloth armors is also on the progress list. The different
armor tracks need to actually do something unique, since in Veloren right now,
armors just give you armor. After a lot of back and forth, we sorted an initial
implementation:

```
- Mail: highest armor
- Stun resistance hide: high critical hit damage
- Stealth cloth: higher energy total, higher energy rewards
```

Stats have been graciously added by @Sam. Each of the tracks has six "core"
armors associated with it, along with possible spinoff armors later. The tracks
are considered equal (for armors of the same vertical level) but benefit
different playstyles. The game is transitioning to more of a crafting-based gear
system instead of findable gear, with the player needing to find the materials
for each set, which might require you to explore multiple areas.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/845894186456973332/screenshot_1621699267850.png",
  caption="Far-off ridges to explore. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
