+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 157"
description = "Entity configs, worldgen"

date = 2022-01-31
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-157"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/937161418522914866/screenshot_1643505226086.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see the progress of gnarling fortifications and weapon trails. We
hear about the worldgen tracking issue from @zesterer, and entity refactors by @juliancoffee.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @juliancoffee, @zesterer, @Dr.Dystopia,
@imbris, @xMAC94x, @Sam, @floppy, @Slipped, @Aweinstock, @Martin, @YuriMomo,
@AngelOnFira, @InfRandomness, @IsseW, @James, @Scott, @Treeco, @threadexception!

@Sam has been working a bit on weapon trails.

{{
    video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/936093287683616798/2022-01-26_21-54-23.mp4")
}}

@juliancoffee migrated the project to Rust 2021. Back to the future! You can
read more about what the [2021 edition includes
here](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/05/11/edition-2021.html). More work is
needed, but gnarling fortifications are slowly getting completed by @Slipped and
others.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/935457202003644416/screenshot_1643100549328.png")
}}

## Worldgen tracking issue by @zesterer

I created a tracking issue for worldgen things (in particular, the move to site2
and the upcoming rtsim refactor). [You can see it
here](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/issues/1444).

The plan is to use it as a central place to coordinate development and break
larger tasks down into smaller ones that can be taken on by individual
contributors. I recommend you take a look at it!

## Entity config refactor by @juliancoffee

I've refactored our entity configs to fix some potential logic holes and extend
features. This can affect any NPC, such as travellers, cultist, or foxes. Now
it's possible to randomly choose which loadout an entity will get and to give
initial inventory items to NPCs in the entity config without the need for
coding. If everything works as planned, you shouldn't notice any behaviour
change yet, but expect greater things soon™️.

Note for server owners with custom assets, you will need to update them to the
new format. To help with this, we created a special tool for migration. To use
it, you'll need to follow a couple of steps.

```
Note: If there were comments in it, they will be erased, so make sure to create backups

1. Execute these commands
  $ git checkout 7585c8 # to go back in history, where this tool is active
  $ cargo run --bin entity_migrate --features bin_entity_migrate
2. Follow instructions of binary
3. Grab migrated assets folder and replace old assets folder with it
4. Check if everything is ok
```

Have fun!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/937161418925539388/screenshot_1643506782327.png",
    caption="A midnight meeting among unusual suspects. See you next week!") }}

{{ support() }}
