+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 136"
description = "Economics, Naga"

date = 2021-09-06
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-136"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/883881676198010920/screenshot_1630804161292.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++


\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @Naryadchikov, @XVar, @xeriab, @Sam, @Slipped, @khalludi, @xMAC94x, @slashplusplus, @Sharp, @juliancoffee, @ubruntu, @Snowram, @knightresspaladin, @imbris, and @Capucho!

@nomango hosted a gliding race from the town of Sist, in the highest mountain
peak of the map, to the town of Irronk at the foot of the mountain. Organizing
it was a fun experience, and in the end 5 people participated and a bunch more
watched. The winner was @Boudin, congratulations!

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/883425538075656192/image.png",
  caption="The race contestents", size=40)
}}

## Improvements by @juliancoffee

I've recently been working on new server setting and command!

- `battle_mode` setting Global(PvP/PvE) or PerPlayer(default: PvP/PvE)
- `/battlemode` command which allows you to switch between your battle mode (pvp
  and pve). Can be used once in 5 minutes, only in towns and only if server
  enabled PerPlayer() `battle_mode` setting. Enabled on official server which
  means no more ganking of new players!

### Balance changes

Chests no longer spawn on the starting floor of dungeons (and more of
them spawn in final floors). Chests now have equal chance of spawning between
different dungeon levels.

### Developer experience changes

- `VELOREN_ASSETS_OVERRIDE` environmental variable should help to run
  servers with modified assets (should be declared as on server machine and on
  client machines) and allows you to add folders with assets you want to have
  at a higher priority (while keeping every other assets the same).
- Refactor of server and voxygen code that interacted with skills to make it
  easier to add new skills and modify existing ones. Main changes are
  the `SKILL_MODIFIERS` constant which stores every constant used for skills
  in a more declarative way to specify skill icons in voxygen code.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/884577918242664498/screenshot_1630924097231.png")
}}

## Cultist Raiders by @Sam

Cultist raiders have been added. Now, cultist raiding parties will periodically
set out from cultist dungeons to raid nearby settlements for sacrifices. In
adding them, the realtime simulation system needed to be slightly expanded to allow for rtsim
entities being attached to a particular site as well as have the species,
loadout, and alignment of the rtsim entity being specified instead of just
entirely random.

## Naga by @Capucho

Last week we merged the MR replacing `shaderc` with `naga`, but despite the MR
only having one commit and a three week merge window, the work to make `naga`
capable of parsing all of Veloren's `glsl` shaders and emitting `spir-v` took
more than a year!

The initial reasoning behind this switch was to make the lives of developers
easier. `shaderc` adds more requirements to the tools needed to compile
Veloren and was a bit of nightmare when trying to cross-compile to macOS in CI.
But after working with `naga` and integrating into Veloren, there are some other
benefits:

### Validation

`naga`, being part of the webgpu pipeline means that it's exposed to potentially
bad shaders that can cause issues with gpu drivers and potentially bring them
down. A validation layer is added that rejects shaders that can cause this bad
behavior. In Veloren, this is very helpful since bad shaders can go unnoticed on
developers' machine and produce bad results for end users or affect performance. In
particular, uniformity analysis has caught a handful of errors with texture
sampling that can cause undefined behavior.

### Error messages

The error infrastructure of `naga` allows easy
coupling with error reporting crates like `codespan`. This allows for Rust-like
error reporting, but this is an area that needs more work for example hints.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/693844604226764871/883487483285876756/img-2021-05-14-221731.png")
}}

---

So far everything has behaved extremely well, though there are some people
reporting black worlds when using high lightning settings. The cause hasn't
yet been identified and for most users has been working correctly. If you do see
a black world go to the graphics settings and change lightning to type `L -
Cheap`.

The `glsl` frontend despite being in a pretty good state is still far from being
completed. I intend to support some of the more popular extensions to the
language, for example include directives that are for now being handled by
`glsl_include`. There's also the question of optimizations that are for now
delegated to the driver, but in the future may also happen in `naga`.

I really enjoyed working in `naga` and with the people building it (special thanks
to @kvark for reviewing and helping out in my contributions). I've worked on some
other things besides `glsl`, most recently the `spir-v` frontend so that in the
future we can migrate to `wgpu` 0.10

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/884472942891786260/screenshot_1630938649026.png")
}}

## Assignment problem by @Christof

This week, I've been working on solving the [Assignment Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assignment_problem) for Veloren.

Simulating economies is not that hard to understand; you start with a
bunch of resources, define a goal (e.g. population growth) and then steer the
population to create secondary/tertiary/... goods to fulfill this goal. The above-mentioned "assignment" is the answer to the question "how many
farmers/hunters/guards/... do I need to achieve that goal?" (or more generic: "How
to assign NPCs to professions?")

The previous solution in Veloren was to assign according to the relative surplus
per produced good (called value). This worked just fine for non-merchants, as merchants trade but don’t produce goods, thus there is an upper limit in
available goods. At some point employing more and more merchants won’t give you
more of that rare good you desperately look for.

Also this was just a relative
assignment, you could not plan how long each person would need to work to
produce the needed amount of goods. On top of this, I recently added more
complications to the system: People use some tools for their work, thus these
tools are needed but not consumed. Also I wanted coal and animal dung to
potentially replace wood as fuel, introducing another tricky logic puzzle.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/884297602462539876/screenshot_1630903166427.png")
}}

So I came up with the plan to define an error function and simply minimize the
quadratic sum. This sent me on a path where I learned a lot of numerical
algorithms I never took a closer look at before. A mathematician friend was my
guide on this journey.

Once the pieces come together the solution is easy and
robust; just use a matrix to calculate the necessary change in assignment from
the difference to your target in produced goods. If you also want to take stock
fill into account, just apply a nonlinear mapping of the difference to the
target before applying this matrix. This is similar to the Gauss Newton
algorithm and its generalization for not directly invertible matrices, the
Levenberg Marquardt algorithm.

These use a matrix derivative of the error
function and invert it to compute the next step. Luckily you can phrase the
equation differently; you need the difference in input which causes a change in
output. Basically, the derivative of the input to the output (the inverse of the
normal derivative). And this matrix is easy to write down by hand; how many
people do you need to add of each profession (recursively) for an increase of
one - per good. This easy to understand concept is the true meaning of the three
multiplied matrices `(JT*J)^-1*JT` in the Gauss Newton algorithm.

On this journey I also tried pseudo-inversion of matrices - a mathematical
concept which defines sort of invertability for non-quadratic matrices. This
pseudo inverse is typically computed by using an SVD algorithm and gives the
result of the three matrix multiplication with less numerical error.

Unfortunately this matrix also resulted in negative numbers - stealing raw
materials from other professions instead of pushing them through the whole
supply chain. And in simulation this quickly caused a general shortage of people
producing important stuff.

To get the new system ready I still have to complete the planning of merchants
and the correct mapping of in game items to economic goods. Also I would like to
modify the type of buildings, the loadout and the behaviour of the town dwellers
according to the economic situation of the town.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/884140239134789642/screenshot_1630865775592.png",
  caption="A cave to explore")
}}

{{ support() }}
