+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 69"
description = "Intro meeting, Open Collective"

date = 2020-05-25
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-69"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/714214218009673758/screenshot_1590352323747.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we had our 0.7 meeting. @zesterer gives us a run down on how chunk
generation and loading works. @imbris discusses progress on switching to iced
for the main menu.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Treeco, @Pfau, @Songtronix, @AngelOnFira,
@zesterer, and @Sharp!

This week, Gaming On Linux [wrote an
article](https://www.gamingonlinux.com/2020/05/veloren-an-open-source-rpg-inspired-by-cube-world-has-a-new-release)
about our 0.6 release. @imbris has been working on the UI library switch to
iced. He is working on moving over small pieces of the codebase at a time.
@CapsizeGlimmer has been working NPC speech bubble functionality. @Slipped has
been working on some animation fixes.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/715179301762236536/unknown.png")
}}

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/715180469620179024/unknown.png",
  caption="New hairstyles and eyes for Danari and Dwarfs")
}}

{{
  audio(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/714146058233708584/Into_the_Dark_Forest.ogg",
  caption="Into the Dark Forest by @Aeronic")
}}

## 0.7 Intro Meeting

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/714196826454229082/Screenshot_20200524_202805.png",
  caption="Lots of attendees at the meeting!")
}}

We had the 0.7 intro meeting last Sunday. You can find the meeting notes
[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z-8-bIhQF1-HXHrfhRV_yTIwtr7kMZa0qXJgTmbZrEM/edit).
We decided that 0.7 development will start on June 1st, and release August 1st.
Like always, we wrote up a definition of 0.7 of what we would like to see from
the perspective of a player:

> As a player, I want to get quests from NPCs in settlements. I want to be sent
> to kill enemies, collect objects, or complete dungeons. I want to be sent from
> village to village and become familiar with the region.

> I want to be able to open the map and get information where I need to go for a
> quest. I want to be able to easily find where dungeons, villages, and other
> points of interest are. I want to be able to open a trade window with NPCs in
> villages and buy and sell items. I want to be able to craft items with
> ingredients that I have.

> I want to be able to see and hear more while in combat. I want to feel good
> while doing combat. I want to see particle effects from magic, and hear swords
> clashing together. I want to be able to add people to my combat party and
> interact with the game UI to do this.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/715220549776834640/unknown.png")
}}

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/715220573138976889/unknown.png",
  caption="New updated models by @Gemu")
}}

We also discussed version numbers as we approach the higher numbers of 0.X.0. We
decided that after 0.9.0 would come 0.10.0, followed by 0.11.0. This will allow
us more versions to make the game we've dreamed of without feeling pressured.
Also, we would have to make 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9 much larger to accommodate for 1.0
right after. As we saw with 0.6, large versions are best to stay away from. We
also wrote down systems that are likely to be included, as well as experimental
systems that could be explored further:

```
## Things it could include
- Quest system
- World sim
- More interactions in settlements
- More advanced UI
- Implementing design team features
- Story elements
- Audio system for combat to add more layers of music

## Experimental systems to look at
- Modding support (Mun, other scripting languages)
- LoD
- Settlement sim
- Animation system extensions
- SFX framework
- Networking system
```

We also officially announced the rollout of our OpenCollective account. For
those who want to donate to development, this is the way to do it. It will help
us support the cost of infrastructure for now. However, in the future, it may be
used to compensate core developers for full-time work. You can check out our
[Open Collective account here](https://opencollective.com/veloren).

## Work on iced with @imbris

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/715106843055358012/unknown.png",
  caption="Main menu switch to iced progress")
}}

> Was it a pain to get working? Or was it easier than to work with conrod?

In my opinion, iced is a lot easier to work with. A lot of the effort I put in
was trying to get the scaling with window resizes to look nice. With conrod I
would just scale everything down but iced's layouting offers the potential for
smarter scaling which first compresses empty spaces before shrinking the ui
elements.

There are some issue though. For example, the text widget does not have a way to
adjust its size based on the available space. So I had to make a custom widget
that does this. I think once I get all the foundations worked out it will be
really nice to work with. Another pain was figuring out text rendering. That's
not an iced issue though.

## Chunk Generation by @zesterer

There are a bunch of things going on behind the scenes that enable chunk
generation to be relatively quick. In something resembling an ordering that goes
from the 'core' of the engine out to the periphery of it:

1. We have a very efficient in-memory chunk storage format that not only allows
   us to use very little memory when storing chunks, but also allows chunk data
   to be very cache-friendly ([more information
   here](https://veloren.net/devblog-16/)).

2. The world generation code has been optimised to cache important data at
   various stages (although there's still a lot of work to be done here) as well
   as only performing generation calculations for ranges of blocks that it knows
   in advance are noteworthy (no point wasting time generating blocks that are
   100 metres in the air, for example).

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/714189226656399481/unknown.png",
  caption="New skillbar design in progress")
}}

3. When sending chunk data to clients, the data is always compressed due to
   point (1) but gets compressed even further by running it through the LZ4
   compression algorithm. After all of this, chunks that might easily require
   300 KB of memory with a naive approach to storage now require perhaps only a
   10th of that on average.

4. Clients have a thread pool that is used to quickly siphon heavy-duty work
   such as meshing off the main thread and on to to a worker thread running on
   (hopefully) another core. This means that the rendering thread can continue
   to run smoothly without interruption.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/714203259081981973/snap2020-05-24-15-48-27.png",
  caption="A falcata by @AlbinoAxolotl")
}}

5. When handing chunk data off to clients, we use a COW (Copy On Write) system
   to immutably reference chunk data during meshing. This allows multiple
   threads to refer to the same chunk data at once (including the main thread)
   without copying the data (in most cases).

6. The meshing code is very optimised. For each chunk, we carefully
   pre-calculate the range of blocks that need checking when performing surface
   extraction to avoid doing work for blocks that we know in advance do not have
   exposed faces. In addition, we move through the chunk data through the
   primary axis, z, to allow for good cache coherency. In the process we also do
   our best to avoid accessing block data multiple times, caching block solidity
   information between each face test.

7. Chunk meshes have a very compressed vertex format. We're able to squeeze x,
   y, z, r, g, b, AO, volumetric lighting, and surface normal information all
   into just 8 bytes per vertex. There's still a lot more to be done in this
   space of course, but this means that the chunk vertex buffers are fast to
   upload to the GPU and also fast to render once on the GPU since we can fit
   more vertices within the cache.

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307708146581519/715543045520752680/k_eB5AP-rqIHXCG58yWsIH6NIdDxFjOKPz47ujRHorU.png",
  caption="Level 200 achieved by @Redo! See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
