+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 152"
description = "Item display"

date = 2021-12-27
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-152"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/924852795373412352/Screenshot_from_2021-12-27_03-30-43.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about some updates to the item displays. The Christmas
holiday event is coming to a close.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @imbris, @DoctorKompot, @zesterer,
@DaforLynx, and @UncomfySilence!

@Christof added some Christmas decorations with the help of @Sarra_Kitty.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/923242438636765184/screenshot_1639510180126.png")
}}

@Christof is also working on skiing, which is not yet ready as physics and
animations aren't finished. Hopefully, we can hit the slopes in 2022!

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/923242909405413396/screenshot_1639769809401.png")
}}

@DaForLynx, @Oolnokk, and @Rarnage have been working on adding new music to the
game. Expect some more variety.

# Item Displays by @DoctorKompot

This week, I updated the item displays! All the items that were still using old
PNG files to display in the inventory have been updated to `.vox` models, which
look a lot better. Credits to @Gemu for the awesome art.

I also updated the item quality backgrounds, making them lighter, as it was
pretty hard to tell what item you were looking at sometimes.

Other changes:

- Phoenix Feather is now Legendary quality
- Yeti loot table has been tweaked by @UncomfySilence (*The Polaris lantern and
  Boreal Warhelm are no longer dropped by the wild Christmas Yeti*)
- @Pfau's Turban hat has been worked on to better fit the head of characters

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/925007924135346176/new-item-models2.png")
}}

## Devblog Recap by @Dalyc

Be sure to check out last week's devblog recap by @Dalyc if you missed it!

{{ youtube(id="Zbgb3JRKIHs")}}

<hr>

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/923770145829171200/screenshot_1640314323782.png",
    caption="A Christmas tree in town. See you in 2022!")
}}

{{ support() }}
