+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 84"
description = "Compilation Breakdown"

date = 2020-09-07
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-84"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/753336526720598127/I7K0KVZRM8Hx8oJFyMGhDAN5TcN011kMkl2DVhkNKu8.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, lots of small updates were made. Airshipper 0.4.0 was released! We
take a look at a photo gallery of what has been going on.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @imbris, @DoctaRay,
@TheThirdSpartan, @zesterer, @notoria, @Pfau, @Sharp, @Capucho, @termac, @law4x,
and @scottc!

The [August edition](https://rust-gamedev.github.io/posts/newsletter-013/) of
the Rust Gamedev Newsletter is out! We also hit 5000 commits on our Gitlab repo!
We also have 5000+ members on our Discord, and most importantly, less than 450
crate dependencies!

@Capucho got the new `server-cli` merged and it is working on the WGPU branch.
@TheThirdSpartan worked on personalizing chat messages, and added more detailed
death messages. @Pfau interacted a lot with the active players to see what could
be improved in the short term. Hopefully, these can be addressed in the next few
weeks.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/753315261612032060/screenshot_1599674599847.png",
    caption="Treehouse")
}}

@zesterer has been working on improving the developer workflow surrounding
sites. He wants to make them faster to generate, and more accessible to other
devs. @Sam created a system that can handle beam-like attacks. He and @Slipped
are doing some research on how to implement keyframe animations. More on this in
the coming weeks. @DoctaRay refactored how fullscreen toggling works.

## Compilation Breakdown by @AngelOnFira

I was reading [an
article](https://blog.mozilla.org/nnethercote/2020/09/08/how-to-speed-up-the-rust-compiler-one-last-time/)
about speeding up Rust compilation. It then led me to [another
article](https://blog.mozilla.org/nnethercote/2019/10/10/visualizing-rust-compilation/)
that was more specific to visualizing how fast Rust compiled your program. In
the context of Veloren, this could be quite useful. We are dependent on over 500
crates, and clean builds take often around 20 minutes on most computers. A
breakdown of what takes the longest could help improve compile times.

This particular visualization came from just adding `-Z timings` to cargo build.
Specifically, `cargo +nightly build -Z timings`. Nightly is required, as it is
an unstable feature. This creates an HTML file that you can open in the browser.
You can download it
[here](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/449654102553788417/752868394138599539/cargo-timing-20200908T114615Z.html)
if you'd like to take a look at it yourself. If you want to read more about the
timings flag, you can read the [documentation on
it](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/unstable.html#timings)

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/753317533037363280/unknown.png",
    caption="Input information")
}}

Above is some of the preliminary information. We can see what binaries and
libraries we're building by default. We can also see how many items have to be
compiled from scratch, the "dirty units". I'm using a CPU with 16 threads, so
the total compile time is significantly lower than what we would see on our CI
runners, or other contributors' computers.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/541307708146581519/753316157846585454/unknown.png",
    caption="Unit compilation timeline")
}}

Next, I took a look at all of the individual compile jobs that took more than 13
seconds. Most jobs take significantly less, so this only shows the 27 most
impactful of the 509 jobs. `veloren-voxgen` is a good benchmark to look at, as
it's the final unit that has to link any previous dependency units. This cannot
be done concurrently. Anything that approaches the amount of time
`veloren-voxgen` takes should really be looked into.

Looking at this graph, we also see that each job has a blue section and a purple
section. The purple represents the amount of time that a unit is spending on
codegen. The blue is the rest of the time, presumably waiting for dependencies
to be ready.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/753317394528862208/unknown.png")
}}

Here we have another breakdown of the timing of each unit. We can see how much
time it took just for codegen, as well as the features it was compiling.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/753316499313131661/unknown.png")
}}

Finally, we can see a graph of CPU usage over the entire process.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/752769415946436608/unknown-6.png",
    caption="Happy Birthday to @Gemu this week! See you next time!")
}}

{{ support() }}
