+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 72"
description = "Economic Simulation, Networking"

date = 2020-06-15
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-72"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/722458486365225009/KmRCJdxQ8F5-1rgc8wGQHw8PfqJ5SnFzTnOPY5hrWOs.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we have work from new contributors. We hear from @zesterer about
test economic simulations. @xMAC94x has been working on merging networking, and
wrote about the process.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @imbris, @Pfau, @WelshPixie, @scottc,
@xMAC94x, @Shandley, @AngelOnFira, @xvar, @Songtronix, @Slipped, @yusdacra, and
@JamesTai!

@Acrimon has been rewriting the authentication server. He is transitioning from
a microframework and tiny_http to warp and hyper which is more robust and gets
rid of the currently possible slow loris attack by being async. @Songtronix has
merged most of the changes to the book. There are still sections that need to be
worked on, but it now has a lot more information. @lobster has been working on
improvements to combat. This includes energy regen resetting properly, and
ability usage.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722259515948400680/snap2020-06-15-21-19-34.png",
  caption="Executioner sword by @AlbinoAxolotl")
}}

@Slipped has been hard at work this week. He added a secondary bow attack and
made arrows visible when holding the bow. @Slipped also worked on completing the
glidewield branch with @imbris for carrying the glider around on the ground.
@Slipped, @Snowram, and @Gemu work on quadruped overhaul branch. @AVeryLostNomad
is continuing work on an indoor camera mode.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722135183096283217/new_mobs.png",
  caption="New quadrupeds by @Gemo and @Snowram")
}}

There have been lots of new contributors joining recently. @WelshPixie has been
working on lots of new flora. @mainCharacter is working on proofreading some of
the writing with the lore blogs. @RENCURELI is going to be working on a document
proposal for level design. It will also include some ideas for world generation
guidelines.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/722085100191481866/Screenshot_from_2020-06-15_15-27-43.png",
  caption="New flora by @WelshPixie")
}}

# Economic Research by @zesterer

Recently, I've been doing a heap of research: Marginalism, the Lange–Lerner
model, and various other models for centrally-planned economies. I've attempted
to implement aspects of Lange–Lerner into Veloren's economic simulation. I think
I've got site economies converging on Pareto-efficient production configurations
now so that's nice.

Below is a graph of the rationalised values (roughly analogous to internal
economy prices) of various commodities over the 500-year lifetime of a site. A
site in this case is an arbitrary village or city type of object. Note that the
natural environment and worker productivity is remarkably stable, hence the
manner in which value rationalisation converge toward stable values. Also, the
value is in arbitrary units (i.e: it's not "per Kg" or something like that) so
comparing values isn't really worthwhile right now.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722069822942478356/unknown.png",
  caption="Internal economic prices of commodities for a site")
}}

Next, we have a graph of the same site, this time the stocks are maintained by
the site of each commodity. In practice, the stock of a commodity is roughly
proportional to the demand for that commodity (in arbitrary units) over the
course of a year.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722070320907026492/unknown.png",
  caption="Stocks maintained by site of commoditiy")
}}

Since the Lange-Lerner model involves deriving commodity values by
trial-and-error, you can see that the initial values are necessarily arbitrary
and so the site goes through a period of economic instability before converging
on values that are Pareto-efficient (in a market economy, this would be the
market equilibrium).

And, for that same site, below is the workforce allocation for each occupation.
The units now are not arbitrary and actually correspond to a number of
individuals (fractional values are taken to mean that an individual only
performs the given labour for a fraction of the year).

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722071319591780352/unknown.png",
  caption="Workforce allocation for each occupation")
}}

Note that all of these graphs are relatively meaningless right now since I've
not set up industries and natural resources correctly yet. I'm basically just
using them to ensure that the economy reaches Pareto-efficiency rather than
misallocating resources and spiralling off into producing far more wheat than
could ever be turned into consumable food (as was an issue I had before).

Interestingly, the economy seems to go through cyclical periods of economic
instability. This is expected since it's a chaotic system. You might say that
these are analogous to boom-bust cycles that we experience under modern
capitalism, although in this case value rationalisation goes through a damping
process that should get rid of most of that.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722072600490016888/unknown.png")
}}

I just added some random seasonal variation for the supply of natural resources
and as you can see the respective commodity values fluctuate accordingly to
compensate for this (including for goods that are derived from natural
resources).

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722075466030252102/unknown.png",
  caption="Seasonal variation of natural resource supply")
}}

# Networking Work by @xMAC94x

The new `veloren_network` crate was merged into the main source code by @xMAC94x
this week. The merge wasn't as easy as it sounds, as there were some still
errors in documentation, metrics delivery, and the implementation. Luckily these
were found by @imbris and @Songtronix. Additionally, I noticed some timing
behavior that occurred on PC's with less than 8 cores. It appeared in CI and was
hard to track down. The code has been merged for a week now, and running tests
in the background without any problems. The next step towards new networking is
to actually start using it in the Veloren codebase and see how it works out.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/722135150397227148/mouflon.png",
  caption="Mouflon by @Snowram")
}}

# MacOS Linking Error by @xMAC94x

Recently I found a toolchain blocker that prevented building for MacOS. Usually
we update our rust-toolchain once a month. Last time we tried, we ran into some
errors in the MacOS pipeline as there was a linkage error. After writing a [Rust
bug report](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/73370) it seems to be
finally someone who wants to fix it, so that we can upgrade again 😄

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/540224034412036099/722497316803575858/unknown.png",
  caption="Expedited fix by the Rust team!")
}}

# Compilation Improvements by @xMAC94x

Following the CI improvements from last week, this week now had a series of
compilation improvements. This was mainly done by removing multiple versions of
the same crate, removing unused features, or switching over to other crates
which are more low level and suit our task better. As an example; until now we
shipped a full-blown web-server AND web-client with `veloren-voxygen`. We used a
`web-server`, build for handling hundreds of simultaneous connections to serve
our metrics to a single consumer! We replaced `rouille` by `tiny_http` as our
server. Also, we use a full blown `web-client` which was build complex tasks to
make a few calls to the `auth` service. We replaced `reqwest` by `ureq` as our
client.

The result was a reduction in 40 sec in compile time, 12% in total CPU time
(across all cores) and 2 GB of cache for each runner:

|                             |               |       | Old   | New    | Diff |
| --------------------------- | ------------- | ----- | ----- | ------ | ---- |
| <td rowspan=2> Dependencies | `cargo build` | 589   | 480   | -19%   |
|                             | `cargo test`  | 959   | 791   | -18%   |
| <td rowspan=2>Cpu time      | `cargo build` | 3076s | 2680s | -13%   |
|                             | `cargo test`  | 6118s | 5351s | -12.5% |
| <td rowspan=2>Time          | `cargo build` | 4:45  | 4:05  | -12%   |
|                             | `cargo test`  | 7:30  | 7:04  | -6%    |

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/722499152604430456/Screenshot_from_2020-06-15_15-30-59.png",
  caption="A whole world to explore! See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
