+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 146"
description = "EXP sharing, dynamic weather"

date = 2021-11-15
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-146"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/909461674514341909/screenshot_1636895330128.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see some videos of the new dynamic weather. We also hear about how
the new EXP sharing system works.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @Sam, @Oolnokk, @zesterer, @XVar,
@Slipped, @imbris, @UncomfySilence, and @Socksonme!

@Pfau is working on a new outfit for our merchants

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/449660795857403905/907933280098222080/unknown.png")
}}

{{
    youtube(id="DpXwYEe_LWo",
    caption="Veloren ran its first Code Reading Club!")
}}

## Dynamic weather by @zesterer and @Isse

This week, @zesterer and @Isse worked on dynamic weather. Time for some rainy
weather!

{{
    youtube(id="MZwfaohynvc")
}}

{{
    youtube(id="L-izjHwVuiY")
}}

## EXP sharing by @XVar

This week I implemented [EXP sharing](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/merge_requests/2986), which replaces the
previous behaviour of the entity (NPC or player) that deals the final blow
getting 100% of the EXP for a kill. This mechanic encouraged EXP stealing and
didn't fairly reward players when multiple players or groups contributed to a
kill.

EXP on kill is now shared between damage contributors. A "damage contributor" is
either an individual entity, or a group - depending if the attacker is in a
group. This means that not only does the "killing blow" no longer get 100% of
EXP, but multiple groups and individuals all receive their fair share of EXP on
death (assuming they are still within range of the entity when it dies).

The diagram below shows a scenario where two groups of players and a solo player
contributed damage to an NPC that was killed. As you can see, the EXP is split
based on damage contribution but once it reaches a group the EXP is split evenly
to members within the group regardless of their individual damage contribution.
This ensures that all players within a group, even those playing a
support/healer role get their fair share of their group's EXP even though they
contributed less damage.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/909190993381822554/unknown.png",
    size=90)
}}

Damage from a given individual or group only counts towards a kill for 10
minutes since that individual or group's last damage to the entity - after this
period their damage contribution is removed. This avoids the list of damage
contributors growing excessively large for an entity that does a lot of combat
but never dies.

The Damage Contribution calculations implemented for this feature are also
planned to serve as the basis for further enhancements to team play and
anti-griefing measures - for example loot distribution may use the same
calculation to decide which player or group gets a drop.

{{ support() }}
