+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 145"
description = "Textures, concept cities"

date = 2021-11-08
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-145"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/909461674514341909/screenshot_1636895330128.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about some changes to the textures of dropped items. We also
see into how some concept art for larger cities in Veloren is being created.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @Demonic, @Sam, @UncomfySilence,
@jon18, and @XVar!

## New textures of item drops by @Socksonme

I've recently touched up some of the textures for item drops. Instead of having
the default be `BeastMeat`, which isn't really that general, it's now `Pouch`.
I've also changed `BipedLarge` to use `Pouch`, much like how `BipedSmall` does,
and `Object` (for example, the turrets in tier 6 dungeons) now drops `Chest`
instead of `BeastMeat`. We'd eventually want to change how the item drop
textures are chosen, but as of now, they are based on the `Body` type of the
entity, rather than the actual items themselves.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/907572252290187285/BeastMeat.png",
    size=50)
}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/907572405164199987/pouch.png",
    size=50)
}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/907572662996455424/chest.png",
    size=50)
}}

## City concepts by @Hannibal

> Editor's note; for clarity, this section is done entirely in MagicaVoxel, and
> doesn't represent changes to the proc gen of current villages.

I am currently developing the concept art architecture of different biomes and
races for future villages, cities, and towns. I do mockups on MagicaVoxel to
show how potential biome sites could look. So far I have done one variant of
desert biome rework and I am planning for the next few months to design the
architecture of:

- Humans in plains
- Elves
- Danari
- Orcs

This should take me quite some time but will be a massive advancement in terms
of concept art for how Veloren architecture could look.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/909124819633700874/screenshot_1633657158130.png",
    caption="Model imported into Veloren")
}}

The desert city mockup I made was imported on a Veloren test server in October
to see how it would look and to see if the scale was right and it helped me see
what could be improved in terms of design and layering. The biggest changes in
the next mockups will include:

- More variants of houses and assets in general
- More structures and pathed areas
- Better polishing of the smaller assets

Of course, we are a long way from having actual cities in the game but I do
think it's important to start designing concepts now so we know what to aim for
in the long term. A small teaser of the Human Plain Architecture:

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/909125317396955187/Screen_Shot_2021-11-13_at_11.58.32_AM.png",
    size=50)
}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/909126358809083955/Screen_Shot_2021-11-13_at_12.02.42_PM.png",
    size=50)
}}

{{ support() }}
