+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 162"
description = "Steam Deck, Airshipper"

date = 2022-03-07
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-162"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/950793104997355540/screenshot_1646700910990.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about a bug in Airshipper. We also explore some of the
difficulties of running Veloren on the Steam Deck.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Dr.Dystopia, @Christof, @xMAC94x,
@Isee, @Pfau, @DaforLynx, @imbris, @zesterer, @Slipped, and @ninefox!

@Isse has been working on creating new rocks that will be scattered across the
world.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/539518074106413056/954021910444908594/unknown.png")
}}

## Airshipper 0.7.0 release

We've released a new Airshipper version that makes launching Veloren even better:

 - Changelog is rendered
 - Ability to specify ENV variables in airshipper.
 - Heavy under the hood maintenance to improve in the future.

**ACTION REQUIRED**: Please upgrade ASAP as the old Airshipper 0.6 will no longer work in a few days. You can read the [release notes here](https://github.com/veloren/Airshipper/releases/tag/v0.7.0)

## Airshipper fixes by xMAC94x

This week we had a silent bug at Airshipper which was seen during some testing.
Our Gitlab jobs reached the 2,147,483,647 barrier. That is a common number for
computer engineers, for example, until 2014 it wasn't possible for a YouTube
video to get more than this number of views.

Back then google faced a similar issue than we faced, if a video would get more
than this number of views, it would overflow the possible 32-bit number range
and would be -2,147,483,648. Luckily neither YouTube nor Veloren faced an
outage. We were able to patch a version overnight before the weekly Thursday
release by increasing the number to 64-bit. Our new limit is
9,223,372,036,854,775,807, roughly the number of sand grains on earth.

We're also preparing for better multi-architecture and multi-channel support. In
the future, it will be possible to use Airshipper to download different versions
of Veloren and also historic versions. The groundwork for this feature has been
made and the feature will probably come within the next weeks.

## Veloren on Steamdeck by @AngelOnFira

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/949052406740684840/steamdeck4.png")
}}

Last week, I got my Steam Deck in! One of the first things I wanted to try was
running Veloren on it, and seeing what the process of getting into the game was.

Veloren isn't on Steam (yet), but the Steam Deck does have a cool feature where
you can add applications from the desktop mode. And since Steam OS runs on Arch
Linux, the process of installing Veloren isn't so difficult. In the desktop mode
of the deck, I was able to go to the software store and find it without too much
difficulty.

However, after I got the game installed, there were many issues that arose that
would prevent people from playing the game with ease. First off, it seems that
the flatpak version of the game doesn't allow permissions for controller input
to work. We had to download Airshipper manually and launch the game through it
outside of the flatpak version.

Then, it tends to run alright. The controller maps pretty nicely to the inputs
of the game, however, there are interactions that it's much more difficult to
achieve on the Deck. Either the UX can't be navigated easily enough, or it's not
clear how to achieve something.

We mostly saw around 60fps while playing, although in multiplayer on the main
server, we experienced closer to 40fps, and some issues with networking.
Although this could also be because I'm located in North America, and the server
in Germany.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/949049925134606356/unknown.png")
}}

If you want to see more about the problems, you can check out the [tracking
issue](https://gitlab.com/veloren/veloren/-/issues/1486) and the [notes
doc](https://hackmd.io/blfrIqxgR7GtMZY9QW9Bjg). Moving forward, we want to
explore how to create a more clear UI/UX for controller-first experiences. We
also want to explore what graphics settings might be best for this hardware,
since it could be standardized quite easily.

{{ support() }}
