+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 116"
description = "Server physics"

date = 2021-04-19
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-116"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/831321921563000902/veloren-voxygen_PEkeDrIqpL.jpg"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we see lots of changes in the realm of network physics. New crafting
stations are being implemented, and music is getting optimized. Inventory
improvements are also being made.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @xMAC94x, @zesterer, @imbris, @Capucho,
@juliancoffee, @James, @Sam, @UMR1352, @aweinstock, @nwilder, @XVar, @Sharp,
@Yusdacra, @DaforLynx, @gGmMsS123, @Slipped, @hqurve, @Pfau, @holychowders,
@kinggred, @socherbyc, and @Frinsky!

@DaforLynx recompressed all the music and converted all sounds to .ogg, as well
as changed the stone footstep sounds again - new ones are made by @alfy. @Sam
made safe zones remain permanently in the spawn chunk. @Sam also did some
backend work on blocking and parrying, it now just needs animations. Both will
use the same button, however, if you release the block button quickly, it will
become a parry, if you hold the block button it will remain a block.

@Pfau and @zesterer have been working on crafting stations: sprites like anvils,
cauldrons, workbenches, and cooking pots that are required to craft certain
recipes. Hopefully, it'll add an extra layer of depth to the crafting system.
Crafting stations are shown in the crafting menu now. Interacting with a station
opens the corresponding crafting tab.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/833283694072299540/unknown-45.png")
}}

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/833283694277165056/unknown-55.png")
}}

@XVar added a button to sort your inventory, which toggles between 3 different
sort orders. They also fixed a bug that caused UI components to move around when
they shouldn't, and the Diesel to Rusqlite MR was merged. @Christof worked on an
older merge request by @Ada about displaying English as a fallback translation.
After a deep dive into asset manager and its data structures @Christof came up
with a novel design that the borrow checker could agree to. It still needs some
work to get mergeable though.

### Server physics by @aweinstock

I added a per-player setting to switch between server-authoritative and
client-authoritative physics. With client-authoritative physics, which was
previously the default, anyone could set their position and velocity
arbitrarily, allowing them to teleport and fly. This isn't possible with
server-authoritative physics, which makes it nice to have as an option (which
admins can force with the /server_physics command).

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/832727247282503711/screenshot_1618522070729.png")
}}

Server-authoritative physics is currently less smooth, and causes you to feel
more of the latency of the connection to the server. Despite feeling less
smooth, it gives you a more accurate understanding of your position, which
prevents issues like wandering into a dungeon, thinking you've avoided some
attacks successfully, and then dying minutes later because your inputs arrived
too slowly. Once we get better interpolation (and possibly rollback netcode) and
server-authoritative physics is sufficiently smooth, I hope that
server-authoritative physics can be made the default mode.

{{
  video(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/767442908767977473/834070843649949727/veloren_teleport_vp9_20210420.mp4",type="video/mp4")
}}

Dodge roll and fireball staff previously required skill points to be spent on
unlocking melee invulnerability-frames and fireball explosions, respectively. To
make these skills more useful to new characters, I made these upgrades available
by default, and refunded the points that existing characters had spent on them.
The fireball staff now starts out with smaller explosions, but has an extra rank
of radius-upgrade and gives a bigger increase per level (15% vs 10%).

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/833008585616392202/screenshot_1618675150399.png",
  caption="A snowy glide through the mountains. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
