+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 86"
description = "Beam collisions, Combat, Movement"

date = 2020-09-21
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-86"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/756619939070083192/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we see a large number of visual changes. We hear from @Sam about their
work on beam collisions and attack animations. @Slipped gives us an update on
movement and models.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @zesterer, @Slipped, @Henil, @Sharp,
@scottc, @imbris, @droogmic, @Pfau, @martin-t, @Snowram, @xvar, and @xMAC94x!

This week, the stone golem was merged! This will give dungeons a proper boss.
@Pfau has been working on many visual overhauls. @Sam has done a ton of work on
keyframes, animations, and beam collisions. @AngelOnFira and @xMAC94x have been
working on the preliminary steps for the evolution of Veloren's server
infrastructure. This will first start with moving the game server to a Hetzner
data center, and then exploring ways to host our many services efficiently.

@zesterer overhauled the format of `Block`. There aren't that many visible
changes yet, but in time it'll allow more interesting underwater entities. It
tracks fluids independently of terrain sprites so that terrain sprites can
appear underwater without air bubbles.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/756854768650944622/unknown.png",
  caption="Overhaul of the settings window, new language tab")
}}

# Animation Changes by @Slipped

This week, we merged some animation changes largely thanks to @Snowram putting
in a ton of work to clean my mess. The gist is:

- The "critter" body is now deleted (it proved pointless).
- All those critters were given fresh new models and moved over to
  `quadruped_small` which is much more fleshed out (thanks to @Gemu).
- We also built in a pacing system for animals, only implemented on
  `quadruped_medium` for now. Now, instead of just jumping between two different
  run gaits at different speeds, they actually move through a full, proper
  sequence, with no hard transitions, a bit like the picture below shows.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/757494924433162311/animal-gait-animation-stephen-cunnane-thumbnail.png",
  caption="")
}}

Each leg/foot complex runs at an independent, controlled phase depending on the
speed of the run. Basically, they start in a walk by moving lefts and then
rights together, then go into a sort of cross gait, then they go full gallop
with fronts then backs. All while also upping the amplitude of the movement
itself with increased speed. This is so slow movement is gentle while fast
movement is more intense.

The finer details are not super apparent because it's pretty subtle. But the
general, visible result is it looks way more natural at varying speed, and also
solves an old issue where the animal sorta studders in the transition between
gait 1/2. So a good baseline is merged, and just needs a little ironing out in
the coming weeks.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/757495110308069406/screenshot_1599091866706.png",
  caption="")
}}

# Attack Updates by @Sam

> Thanks to @Sam we have keyframes now. Attack animations are now broken into
buildup, swing, recovery stages. We can customize the animation duration of
each, and because they're normalized we can simply change those durations and
the animations will adjust themselves to fill whatever time we give them.

> This also allows us to do things like change the attack speed of a different
type of sword with no additional work. It will perfectly time swing sounds and
swing movement in line with the actual damage portion of the attack, so that all
feels correct without needing to fiddle with alignment to specific animation
points (and then having it break if the attack parameters change). So keyframes
are great. Keep reading to hear what else @Sam has been working on!

> \- @Slipped

{{ youtube(id="o_sBhxT1_e0") }}

<hr>

The sword overhaul reworked how the original two abilities of the sword
functioned, and also introduced a third skill to the sword.

The first skill previously was known as triple strike, and used to be on both
the axe and the sword. It worked by progressing through three strikes, each
increasing in damage. However, there was a lot that was hardcoded for this
character state, and the extent of being able to modify it on weapons was
adjusting the base damage, and determining whether you needed to hold down M1 or
time your clicks.

Now as combo melee, it has become significantly more flexible. The most notable
difference is that it supports more (or less) than three strikes. In addition to
this, the damage of each strike is no longer determined by a hardcoded
multiplier on the base damage, but can instead be individually modified.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/756855081294495795/unknown.png",
  caption="New loading screen background images and art")
}}

In addition to this, other parameters such as attack duration, knockback, range,
and attack angle can now be modified on a per strike basis. Further, combo melee
allows for damage, attack speed, and energy regen to scale as you build combo
while you remain in the combo melee state.

The second skill is still a dash. Though if any of you only recently started
playing you may not have known it was supposed to be a dash. The dash broke some
time ago with an update to how physics is handled since it initially stopped
when it thought that it was touching an entity.

Now, aside from fixing the issue the previously dash had, I also changed how
dash functioned. Dash now continuously drains energy based off of how long you
are in the state, you can hold down M2 to dash as long as you have energy, and
the damage and knockback scale to a maximum value in the first portion of the
charge.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/756856025377800303/unknown.png",
  caption="Button to randomize appearance and name by @Snowram")
}}

The third skill the sword has actually uses the same state that the axe M2 does,
spin melee. However, it is modified so that it has a fixed number of spins, and
can’t just be held down. In addition to this, forced forward movement was added
to this spin (which the first and second skills also make use of). However,
despite the slight changes made to spin melee to accommodate sword, you’ll still
have the classic axe spin physics of ignoring gravity.

In addition to reworking or adding the skills to the sword, an additional change
was made with all of the above abilities. Specifically, when you’re wielding a
sword you can immediately cancel any of the above attacks with any other attack
or a roll. This was done to bring combat using the sword closer to its intended
theme of being relatively fluid in combat.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/756855204682530857/unknown.png",
  caption="FPS counter in the graphics settings")
}}

# Beam Collisions by @Sam

The upcoming sceptre rework introduces a new system for dealing damage; the beam
system. This system works by making a beam segment with a particular origin and
orientation, and then projects a spherical wedge from the origin in the
direction of the orientation. However, to do this I had to create collision code
just for it, which was particularly tricky since every other system of collision
detection in Veloren is either 2D, or one of the objects is a point.

Since entities are currently represented by a cylinder, I broke the code for
spherical wedge-cylinder collision detection into 3 parts:

- Within the same z-range as the cylinder
- Directly above or below the cylinder
- Everything else

The first case, handling the same z-range as the cylinder, was the easiest to
handle. I simply converted it to a two-dimensional case, and then checked that
the cylinder (projected as a circle in 2D) was within the range of the beam
segment, and then I did a check that any portion of the circle was within the
max angle of the beam segment.

I then also needed to make a check outside the x-y plane so that you couldn’t
aim above or below an entity and still hit it, and I just did a simple check in
the r-z plane to see that any portion of the cylinder was within the angle of
the beam’s orientation.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/758359251596083210/unknown.png",
  caption="Case 1")
}}

For the second case, handling collision above or below the cylinder, things
became somewhat more complicated. I didn’t check exactly if the sphere center
was directly above/below the cylinder, but rather if the line between the center
of the sphere and cylinder passed through either endcap of the cylinder. From
there the check to see if the cylinder was in range was simple.

Then, to check if the cylinder is within the max angle, I find both the angle
between the lines from the sphere center to the point on the connecting line
that passes through the endcap and the opposite edge of the sphere, and between
the lines from the sphere center to the point on the connecting line that passes
through the endcap, and the bottom edge of the cylinder. I then use whichever is
largest, add it to the max beam angle, and then compare that new angle to the
angle between the connecting line and the beam orientation. Although this does
overestimate the angle of the beam to some degree, I considered it good enough.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/758359327349932082/unknown.png",
  caption="Case 2")
}}

For the third case, handling collision from anywhere else, things became even
more complicated. The range check was done by using a point on the edge of an
endcap on the cylinder closest to the beam origin, which was still relatively
simple.

However, for the angle check, I would not only need to do the angle check I did
for the second case, but also check for the angle between each of the two side
positions on the endcap of the cylinder and the connecting line. This is because
it then has the potential to be larger than the angle check I did in case 2.
However, since it’ll be symmetrical I can just use half of this angle between
the two side positions. I then use whichever of these three angles is largest,
add it to the max angle of the beam, and compare it to the angle between the
line between the sphere and the close edge of the cylinder endcap and the beam
orientation.

{{
  img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/541307708146581519/758359591725301830/unknown.png",
  caption="Case 3")
}}

In all of these cases, I only use a single position on the cylinder for the
range check to avoid the same beam segment hitting the same entity multiple
times. However, the angle check takes into account the whole cylinder. And with
these three cases, we now have beam collisions!

{{
  img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/756885706428645406/unknown-2.png",
  caption="New boss was merged! See you next week!")
}}

Support our devs!

[Veloren Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/veloren)

@Pfau: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/pfau)

@Songtronix: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/songtronix)

@YuriMomo: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/YuriMomo)

@xMAC94x: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/xmac94x)

@Acrimon: [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/acrimon)
