+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 102"
description = "Professions and Models"

date = 2021-01-11
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-102"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/450064928720814081/795763308056805376/unknown.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, skill trees were completed. We hear from @Christof about some more
work on professions. @badbbad created a new song. Lots of new models by @Gemu
and implemented by @Snowram.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @zesterer, @ccgauche, @XVar, @Pfau, @imbris,
@SWilliamsGames, @xMAC94x, @James, and @ubruntu!

{{
    audio(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/798668789364817990/sweet_water_.ogg",
    caption="New song by @badbbad, 'Sweet Water'")
}}

This week, the latest edition of the [Rust Gamedev Newsletter was released](https://rust-gamedev.github.io/posts/newsletter-017/)! @Sam finished off skill trees. It still
needs a few more visual tweaks and needs to go through code review, but then
they'll be in the game! @Gemu modeled a lot of new creatures, and @Snowram has
been implementing them into the world. In fact, there are now over 100 total
NPCs!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/798202257249271838/unknown.png",
    caption="Modeling gear based on new crafting ingredients by @Gemu")
}}

This week, @Acrimon and @Sharp started working on a new specification for the
multiplayer authentication mechanism. @VincentFoulon has been working on all of the icons needed for the weapon
skills. These are on their way to being implemented in the game.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/798245416180645898/unknown.png",
    caption="New skill tree icons")
}}

# Professions by @Christof

I found the logic error (introduced by me) in the `labor_value` computation and
finally have reasonable economic numbers across sites! I implemented reading
professions (very much like a tech tree) from `.ron` files, which I've recently
completed. Also, I had a lengthy discussion with @zesterer about the nature of
money; I am especially curious whether and how my current idea (coins as a trade
good with a value solely determined by the things a site can buy for it) will
work out. Here is an example of what the professions `.ron` file looks like.

```rust
(
    name: "Miner",
    orders: [ (Quarry, 0.5), (Tools, 0.1) ],
    products: [ (Stone, 0.5) ],
),
(
    name: "Fisher",
    orders: [ (FishingGround, 4.0), (Tools, 0.02) ],
    products: [ (Meat, 4.0) ],
),
(
    name: "Hunter", // Hunter operate outside of uncontrolled areas and resemble guards
    // due to the low number of products we tune down the Armor,Tools,Potions in comparison
    orders: [ (Armor, 0.1), (Tools, 0.1), (Potions, 1.0), (Woodland, 4.0) ],
    products: [ (Meat, 4.0) ],
),
```

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/798201792919502858/unknown.png",
    caption="Basilisk by @Gemu. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
