+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 101"
description = "Skill Trees, Models, Economics"

date = 2021-01-04
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-101"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/523568428905398283/793714069097021470/screenshot_1609306444645.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we start 2021 off with lots of progress. Skill trees are completed
and working towards code review, lots of new models are being worked on, and
larger systems like economic simulation are pushing forward.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

## Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @imbris, @a1phyr, @xMAC94x, @VincentFoulon,
@Nobbele, @zesterer, @XVar, and @Acrimon!

In last week's [behemoth blog post](https://veloren.net/devblog-100/), we didn't
cover lots of the contributor work that was going on. @VincentFoulon has started
working at refactoring localization code to clean up the file and folder
structure of it. @Sam has completed the skill trees for hammers, bows, staffs,
and sceptres.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/793485466875723796/unknown.png",
    caption="Gnarlings by @Pfau and @Gemu")
}}

@ubruntu is nearly done adding RTSim birts that fly around the world. @Pfau
created a skill tree layout generator, and worked on gnarlings. The concept
drawings were worked on by @Gemu. @Scott has been working on improving the look
of the wiki.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/795332627413598248/unknown.png")
}}

### Water Models by @Sarra_Kitty

I've been continuing to work on more models for coral and seaweeds. I added
several more variants of coral, and a seashell item on my branch. You can find
them scattered about on the sand on the reefs! The next step for these is to
make their spawning temperature dependent, so coral reefs will spawn in warm
water, and kelp forests in colder seas.

I like the idea of having a distinction between fresh water and saltwater in the
game as well, so that freshwater lakes and ponds can have things like
waterlilies and pondweed in them, and save the coral for seas and the ocean
proper. Currently, there exists no such system in the game, but I think it's
something to think about!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/795316129634582548/screenshot_1609688116062.png")
}}

### Work on Economic Simulation by @Christof

Thanks to @imbris I was able to significantly reduce the code needed to load
additional (economic) data on demand once a tooltip is displayed (over a site in
the map window). But apart from getting a better understanding of the
complexity, (i.e. anything short of a full political+military+site
building+economy simulation will need manual tweaking to give reasonable
prices), I didn't make much progress in the last two weeks. In the example
below, Trig is lacking access to Wood/Logs to grow further (high value, low
stock; and has an excess of Fish).

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/795549732759273532/Trig.png")
}}

### Skill Trees by @Sam

I just finished the general combat skill tree. This means that the old level and
exp system has been thrown out. The UI is now mostly hooked up for purchasing
skills. Finally, the last of the stuff I needed to do for database persistence
and the migration is done.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/796745252853514250/shot_20210107_152734.png",
    caption="A pieceful village. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
