+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 165"
description = "Airshipper downloads, CliffTowns"

date = 2022-03-28
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-165"

[extra]
banner = "https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/959177283841712279/screenshot_1648756040012.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week, we hear about the new Github Releases system for game updates through
Airshipper. We also hear about how the 0.13 release map will look, and about CliffTowns.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @jh0l, @Sam, @xMAC94x, @JackHollisLondon,
@ubruntu, @InfRandomness, @James, @Slipped, and @holychowders!

@Inojelis was continuing my work on making agents pick up items (ItemDrops).
This week they worked on making agents walk right to the ItemDrops. @Christof
just parallelized economic simulation - shortening server startup time (by a
small fraction) - but this prepares for adding more Goods (econsim groups of
items).

## Github Releases by @Shouvik

I worked on setting up Github releases for Veloren. We can use Github as a
faster and more stable backend for downloading files. Earlier, many users had
sporadic issues with bad connections and aborting updates in Airshipper. Those
should be gone now. Users outside of Europe can especially profit from this fix.

Setting this up involved using the octocrab crate for uploads, and making
changes to Airshipper's database and url structure.

## Incremental Airshipper updates by @aweinstock

@XVar and I have been experimenting with packing extra metadata to facilitate
incremental Airshipper updates into standard zip files. Currently, Airshipper
downloads an entire ~224MB zip containing all the binaries and assets for each
update. Since GitHub Releases supports HTTP range requests, and since zip
supports random access to contained files, if the offsets of files within the
zip that have changed are known--, it's possible to save bandwidth by only
downloading those files from the zip.

Since zip's central directory supports adding a "comment" field containing
arbitrary metadata, we can store hashes there to detect which files need to be
redownloaded before downloading them. Since it's possible to pack a file at the
beginning of a zip that's not indexed in the central directory, it's possible to
prefix enough metadata to the zip to locate the central directory in one
additional range request.

## 0.13 Release Map by @Hannibal

I've been working on the next release party map that will also serve as a
mockup. This map's theme is JUNGLE!!! 🥳 🥳 This time, the party map will be an
entire island. That way, its placement in the water will look less odd than the
desert city did.

Things to expect:

- Lots of trees!
- Jungle temples!
- Tribal villages
- Treehouses
- Secret areas 👀

A first tiny look at the map (although there is much to do!):

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/958016002300473484/snap2022-03-28-16-42-42.png",
    size=60) }}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/958094590789951498/snap2022-03-28-22-05-33.png",
    size=60) }}

## CliffTowns by @floppy

Under @Gemu's artistic supervision and with patient guidance from @zesterer,
@Isse, and others, I have been working on CliffTowns, Hoodoo/Arabic inspired
towns for mountain regions. CliffTowns' houses are natural structures of
sedimentary stone layers, inhabited by Mountaineer NPCs. @MerlinMan created the
great furniture assets.

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/958414703422480384/Screenshot_from_2022-03-29_19-02-46.png")
}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/958414703762231356/Screenshot_from_2022-03-29_19-13-48.png")
}}

{{
    img(src="https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/597826574095613962/958414704173268992/Screenshot_from_2022-03-29_19-15-55.png",
    caption="Living in a cliff town. See you next week!") }}

{{ support() }}
