+++
title = "This Week In Veloren 105"
description = "Travelling merchants, attack rework"

date = 2021-02-01
weight = 0
slug = "devblog-105"

[extra]
banner = "https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/634860358623821835/805527343970910228/screenshot_1612041532893.png"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["devblog"]
+++

This week we hear about the progress of an attack rework by @Sam. @Christof
describes the progress on travelling merchants. @Dumbeldor describes recent
changes to Torvus.

\- AngelOnFira, TWiV Editor

# Contributor Work

Thanks to this week's contributors, @Sam, @Blob, @zesterer, @James, @imbris,
@DaForLynx, @xMAC94x, @Slipped, and @Entropy!

@Redo started working on changing some sound effects. @Gemu has been preparing a
bunch of models for one-handed weapons. @Rotsuoy is reworking the medium
quadruped animations and tweaking the models so that there will soon be prettier
grazing animals with smoother animations. @Snowram worked on adding more lights
to dungeons.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/597826574095613962/805829076295090236/screenshot_1611874891305.png",
    caption="Lights in dungeons by @Snowram")
}}

@James is working on some basic interactions with NPCs. @Entropy has been
working on organizing the asset folder. @Capucho is trying to replace shaderc
with naga on the wgpu branch. @zesterer added snow!

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/539518074106413056/807224849637703700/snow.gif",
    caption="Snow!")
}}

## Torvus update by @Dumbeldor

I'm a new contributor, and this week I added some metrics to Torvus to fix
sending messages from Discord to the Veloren server. You can check out the
[merge request here](https://gitlab.com/veloren/torvus/-/merge_requests/21). If
everything goes well the bot will work and it will be possible to send messages
to Veloren from Discord (and vice versa) without any problem, and we will have a
lot of nice metrics at our disposal to monitor that.

## Travelling Merchants by @Christof

This week, I got the inter-site trade planning finally right. Now (still
invisible) merchants leave their town for a neighboring town. With wares to sell
and a plan of goods to buy, of hopefully still matching total value at the
destination market. Merchants are rated for both the actual wares they should
bring as for additional wares, which currently exceed their transport capacity.
The next step is to fully implement the trade at the destination. There was also
a worldsim meeting where we planned the implementation of behaviour trees, group
AI and moving agent code to the server.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/523568428905398283/805527697362911262/screenshot_1612120593872.png")
}}

## Attack Rework by @Sam

Recently, I completely reworked how attacks functioned and how they are handled.
Before, attacks that were applied via melee, projectiles, explosions,
shockwaves, or beams handled applying the effects from an attack independently.
There was also a lot of boilerplate in how things were handled as code had to be
replicated in all 5 locations. This also meant adding or updating particular
effects were troublesome as it had to be done in 5 separate locations.

Now, each of those 5 systems has an `Attack` struct attached to it. What happens
now is that each of the 5 systems is only involved in determining if an attack
hits. If it does a function takes that `Attack` struct and creates a list of
events that are handled by the server. While making this change, I also added
support for each attack having variable crit chance and crit multiplier. Many
other various effects (such as buffs, energy rewards, knockback, lifesteal, and
more as needed) can also be tacked onto an attack much easier, and with more
freedom in what values are used.

{{
    img(src="https://media.discordapp.net/attachments/634860358623821835/805876096079757333/unknown.png",
    caption="A wandering vagrant off exploring. See you next week!")
}}

{{ support() }}
